133
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Gardens of Political Transformation:
Indigenism, Anarchism and Feminism Embodied
Mary Tuti Baker*
If you let the land go, it’ll take care of itself. What we need
to learn is ... how to become a part of the ‘aina1 – again. -
Imaikalani Kalahele, artist and poet
In this article, I demonstrate the ways that aloha ‘aina, anarchist
principles of horizontal organizing and feminist critique of heteropatriarchy
are embodied in praxis at Ho‘oulu ‘Aina, a garden complex
run by a community health center in urban Honolulu. As the
epigraph above indicates, instead of saving ‘aina, humans need to
rebuild severed relationships with ‘aina. #is reciprocal relationship
of people to land is a fundamental feature of aloha ‘aina, which I
argue is a key element of the ideology that organizes Kanaka Maoli2
political mobilization and nation-building. #eorization of aloha
‘aina as an Indigenous ideology emerges out of thinking and talking
with collaborators while working with our hands in the earth.
#e methodology I employ to theorize Indigenous ideologies is
inspired by Robbie Shilliam’s concept of knowledge cultivation, a
way of thinking that turns and folds the material at hand “back on
itself so as to rebind and encourage growth. #is circulatory process
of oxygenation necessarily interacts with a wider biotope, enfolding
matter from diverse cultivations” (Shilliam 2015, 128–29). Methodologically,
cultivation produces knowledge through building
relationships and networks, where the individuals within the community
are active participants in and contribute to concept building;
mixing and folding in a process of oxygenation that feeds networks
of distinct knowledge systems, encouraging $ourishing without co-
* Mary Tuti Baker is an Assistant Professor at Western Washington University,
where she enjoys joint appointments in Canadian-American Studies, Salish Sea
Studies, and at Fairhaven College. A Kanaka Maoli scholar, she earned her PhD in
Political Science from the University of Hawai‘i at Manoa with specializations in
Indigenous Politics and Futures Studies. Her research examines the relationship
between Kanaka Maoli values and practice and the politics of decolonization.
134
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
ercion or violent force. It is not knowledge produced by some higher
authority for mere consumption by the subaltern (Shilliam 2015,
129). #is approach resonates with the work of Uahikea Maile, who
uses a “selectively promiscuous methodology of queer-Indigenousanarchism”
to theorize non-statist forms of decolonialization (2019,
65). In a similar manner, Kahala Johnson and Kathy Ferguson stage
an encounter between anarchism and Indigenous thought that looks
for “resonances across these %elds of thinking and acting without
insisting on correspodence or eschewing tensions” (Johnson and
Ferguson 2019, 697).
#e article unfolds in three parts. Part One situates my argument,
both identifying my own positionality as Kanaka Maoli/researcher
and situating my research in place. Part Two examines four arenas
of praxis that demonstrate the articulation of indigenism, anarchism
and feminism within an Indigenous model for healthcare in Hawai‘i.
Part three theorizes Indigenous ideologies and the role they play in
nation-building.
Part One: Situating person and place
#is section begins with a personal narrative that moves from my
grandparents’ entanglement with settler colonialism in nineteenth
and early twentieth-century Hawai‘i into my encounters with indigenism,
anarchism, and feminism at Ho’oulu ‘Aina.
Situating Myself
I am Kanaka Maoli. My mother’s mother Lucy Kahikina was born to
Kaneikolia and Amarillo Hazard Perry in the Kohala Mountains on
Hawaii island. My mother’s father, Edwin Puahaulani, was born to a
Hawaiian mother in a %shing village in Anahola, Kaua‘i.
My grandparents were born when Hawai‘i was an independent
nation. When they were babies, an oligarchy of Euro-American
businessmen overthrew the lawful government and eventually gave
the islands to the United States. As young adults, my grandparents
moved to Honolulu, the urban center of the territory, where they
135
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
met and married. My grandmother taught school and my grandfather
parlayed his skill as an accountant and money manager into a
career in politics – successfully navigating between the descendants
of plantation owners who controlled Hawai‘i during the territorial
years and the descendants of plantation workers who controlled
Hawai‘i in the post-statehood era.
When he was a teenager, my grandfather was sent to O‘ahu to attend
Kamehameha School, an educational institution whose mission was
to provide young Hawaiians with
. . . a good education in the common English branches,
and also instruction in morals and in such useful knowledge
as may tend to make good and industrious men
and women (“Kamehameha Schools - Bernice Pauahi
Bishop’s Will and Codicils” n.d.).
My grandmother received a similar education at a seminary for girls
near her childhood home in the Kohala Mountains. An in-depth
discussion of the role of educational institutions in the settler colonial
project to domesticate Indigenous subjects is beyond the scope
of this essay: su&ce it to say that my grandparents’ education played
a major role in their life choices. #ey decided that the best way
forward for their family was to adopt practices and subject positions
that allowed them to thrive within the con%nes of the settler state.
Successfully navigating settler society did not extinguish their deep
connection to place. My grandfather was happiest when in his garden
or %shing at the shore and my grandmother loved to tell stories
of her beloved Kohala mountains. #ey were active in Hawaiian
social groups whose purpose was to perpetuate Hawaiian language
and culture. Hawaiian was my grandparents’ %rst language, their
language of intimacy. #ey relished speaking Hawaiian together and
with other native speakers, but they never encouraged their grandchildren
to communicate with them in their mother tongue. In our
family we ate Hawaiian food, sang Hawaiian songs, and danced hula,
practices that captured the culture of our ancestors in a romanticized
past.
136
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
I graduated from Kamehameha Schools and, like my grandfather,
was socialized into the capitalist political economy of the United
States. In college on the continental United States much of that socialization
was undone during the politically and socially unsettled
late twentieth century. Instead of assimilating into the capitalist
political economy, my political identity formed around anti-capitalist
and anarchist ideals. A'er completing %lm school, I returned home
determined to use my %lmmaking skills to help Hawaiian and Paci%c
Islander communities tell their own stories.
However, before I could work in Hawaiian communities and participate
in Kanaka Maoli nation-building, I had to (re)connect to place.
I returned from the continent a privileged Hawaiian with tenuous
connection to place and community. I needed to put down roots.
#is reconnecting began with digging my hands into the mud at Ka
Papa Lo‘i ‘o Kanewai (Kanewai), the system of lo‘i on the banks of the
Manoa stream that is now one of the anchors of the Hawai‘inuiakea
School of Hawaiian Knowledge at the University of Hawai‘i at Manoa
(“Ka Papa Lo‘i ‘o Kanewai: Our Purpose” n.d.).3 At Kanewai I learned
laulima -- many hands working together to complete a task; and
malama ‘aina -- taking care of the land. I listened to kupuna (elders)
tell the stories of Kanewai and felt the lifeforce of the ‘aina. I joined
with other urban Hawaiians seeking connection to place. At Kanewai
I gained material understanding of aloha ‘aina and kuleana (reciprocal
responsibility), cornerstone principles of political engagement in
Kanaka Maoli nation-building.
Situating Place
I was introduced to Ho‘oulu ‘Aina while in graduate school at
the University of Hawai‘i at Manoa. Like my %rst experiences at
Kanewai, participating in community workdays at Ho‘oulu ‘Aina
rooted my understanding of aloha ‘aina (love of land), kuleana,
(reciprocal responsibility) and waiwai (an economy based on abundance).
It also eventually became the site of %eldwork for my dissertation.
Ho‘oulu ‘Aina is a 100-acre complex of gardens and forest reserve
137
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
operated by Kokua Kalihi Valley Comprehensive Family Services
(KKV), a federally quali%ed health center that serves over 10,000
community members annually. In operation since 1972, the organization
works to foster health in the broadest sense — physical, mental,
emotional, and spiritual. KKV employs 180 sta* who are $uent
in 20 Asian and Paci%c Island languages and dialects. #ey work out
of nine locations throughout Kalihi valley — including two of the
largest public housing communities in the state of Hawai‘i; a 12,000
square foot health center; a 16,500 square foot Wellness Center; and
a 4,000 square foot Elder Center. KKV has integrated practices that
strengthen the connection between people and land in its health
protocols through programs o*ered at Ho‘oulu ‘Aina (Kokua Kalihi
Valley website n.d.).
KKV and Ho‘oulu ‘Aina are situated in Kalihi, an ahupua‘a4 on the
island of O‘ahu that runs from the %shing grounds of Mauliola in
Mamala Bay to the misty peaks of the Ko‘olau Mountains. In 1835,
Fredrick Bennet, an early tourist to the islands, described Kalihi as a
land with “the %nest soil in the world”(Bennett 1970, 202). Inspired
by the narratives of travelers like Bennett, Europeans and Americans
arrived in nineteenth century Hawai‘i to settle, bringing with
them new governance structures and ways of organizing economic
productivity that challenged the established norms of ‘Oiwi society.
In the era of ‘oiwi wale no,5 and well into the era of European in$uence,
extended families in Kalihi cultivated taro in agricultural terraces
along the streams running from the lush upland forests to the
shore, where families tended numerous %shponds in the estuaries at
Mauliola (Palama 2005, 12–13). #is was the basis of economic life
in Kalihi as it was throughout the islands in ‘oiwi wale no times. In
the ensuing century, settlers from Europe and America took control
of vast tracks of land, transforming the economy of Hawai‘i from
sustenance agriculture to an economy based on industrial-scale production
of sugar cane grown on large plantations (Cooper and Daws
1990; Kame‘eleihiwa 1992; Kent 1993; McGregor 2007). Unsuited for
industrial agriculture, Kalihi occupied the liminal space between the
sugarcane plantations on the fertile plains of Central O‘ahu and the
business hub around Honolulu harbor.
138
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Today, Kalihi is a working-class community in Honolulu’s urban
core. Free-$owing streams from the forested uplands are con%ned
to man-made channels in the lowlands: the banks of these sluggish
canals are crowded with warehouses, industrial complexes and
occasional encampments of house-less people. #e water’s journey
ends at Mamala Bay. #e constant movement of cargo into Honolulu
harbour and the hundreds of $ights leaving and arriving at Honolulu
International Airport daily has devastated the nearshore habitat of
Mauliola. Adjacent to the airport, Hickam Air Force Station and Fort
Sha'er Army Base provide services to the ever-present military.
Industrialization and immigration are the new stories carved into
the Kalihi landscape. Urban development “forced the landless into
fast-appearing slums. Project housing went up in the beautiful valleys
of Kalihi and Palolo, transforming them into ramshackle ghettos
where drugs and crime stalked increasing numbers of unemployed
youth” (Trask 1987, 138). Trask’s observations on the displacement of
the landless comes from an essay about the eviction of farmers and
poor working-class families from Kalama Valley in 1971 to make
way for a middle-class housing development. Trask argues these
evictions were indicative of the growing tension between developers
who controlled most of the real estate in Hawai‘i and the state’s poor
and working-class residents. #is was also the moment when young
Native Hawaiians who put their bodies on the line at Kalama Valley
realized their struggle, as Native Hawaiians, had a much deeper
meaning. As Trask writes:
#eir collective e*ort to preserve the land rights of local
people in that dry, 250-acre valley on O’ahu’s east
end would be remembered long a'er as the spark that
ignited the modern Hawaiian Movement, an ongoing
series of land struggles throughout the decade of the
seventies that was destined to change the consciousness
of Hawai‘i’s people, especially her native people (Trask
1987, 126).
#e Kalama Valley struggle marked a turning point in political consciousness
for Native Hawaiians.
139
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
At the same time that the momentum for Native Hawaiian selfdetermination
was building, a group of concerned women, primarily
Paci%c Island immigrants now living in the Kalihi community, were
working with a local pastor to bring services to Kalihi that state and
local governments were unable or unwilling to provide. #e result
was KKV, an organization that has been serving Kalihi for nearly 50
years.
Over the years KKV has garnered national attention for its groundbreaking
approach to community health. In 2004, the organization
received a grant to develop a community engagement program
called Acting Living by Design. In addition to opening a bike center
where young people could learn how to repair and maintain bicycles,
KKV proposed to establish community gardens where people could
come together to grow food. #e bike center was centrally located in
a warehouse around the corner from the main clinic but %nding an
appropriate location for the garden was not as easy. KKV sta* identi-
%ed three potential sites for the community food cultivation project,
including two public housing projects, an under-utilized city park,
and an undeveloped state park in the upper reaches of the valley.
Hamamoto, Derauf, and Yoshimura described the selection process:
While the small barriers to development quickly arose
for three of the four areas (e.g., city government red tape,
slow pace of public housing support), State support in
handing over management of the Kalihi Valley Nature
Park to KKV was remarkably smooth (Hamamoto, Derauf,
and Yoshimura 2009, S348).
With broad-based community support, KKV signed a lease with the
state for the 100 acres which was to become the gardens and forest of
Ho‘oulu ‘Aina.
Ho‘oulu ‘Aina emerges out of a desire at KKV to introduce Hawaiian
land-based practice into its healthcare facility. Under the leadership
of Kanaka Maoli artists and practitioners, Ho‘oulu ‘Aina has become
both a welcoming place for newcomers and a place of Native Hawaiian
resurgence. It has grown into a site where Kanaka Maoli, immi140
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
grants and settlers alike come to heal from the trauma of displacement.
Part Two: Indigenism, Anarchism and Feminism in
Kalihi Valley6
Unlike other community health centers, KKV has health protocol
practices that strengthen the connection between people and
land. Kanaka Maoli ‘place-based’ values are central to carrying out
Ho‘oulu ‘Aina’s mission: to be “a welcoming place of refuge where
people of all cultures sustain and propagate the connections between
the health of the land and the health of the people” (Ho‘oulu
‘Aina n.d.). #ese connections are made available to the community
through public workdays. In the course of my research at Ho‘oulu
‘Aina I participated in community workdays and other volunteer opportunities
and conducted a number of semi-structured interviews.
My %ndings highlight the ways that indigenism and anarchism intersect
in a place imbued with the force of Haumea, an ancestral mana
wahine.7 I observed ‘aina-based values of malama kekahi-i-kekahi
(care for one another), kuleana (reciprocity and responsibility) and
waiwai (an economy based on abundance) in practice at Ho‘oulu
‘Aina alongside anarchist principles, including $uid leadership and
horizontal power structures.
Mana wahine (ancestral feminine forces) and the many forms of
Papa
A mottled green sign -- “#is land is your grandmother and she
loves you” -- greets people as they drive through Ho‘oulu ‘Aina’s
gates. Ho‘oulu ‘Aina is on the edge of the wao akua or, as Pua Kanahele
explains, the realm of the generative spirits of the forest (Pualani
Kanaka‘ole Kanahele 2003, 11). Mo‘olelo oral and written literature
and history tell us that Papahanaumoku and Wakea, the progenitors
of the Hawaiian Islands, live in the upper reaches of Kalihi Valley. In
“Na mea kaulana o ka lipolipo o Kalihiuka” (#e famous things in
the depths of upland Kalihi), ‘Oiwi scholar Joseph Mokuohai Poepoe
writes of the mana wahine spirit in the upper reaches of the valley:
141
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Of Papa it is said that she was a woman more than
mortal, a kupua [demigod or culture hero], and that she
bore many names, such as Papa, Haumea, Kameha‘ikana.
Wakea was a man and human and he was the husband
of Papa when she was called Haumea. And they le' the
borders of Kahiki and became the parents of the Hawaiian
people and lived on the hill of Kilohana, which
stands high up in the valley of Kalihi uplands (Poepoe,
n.d.).
Brandy Nalani McDougal (2016) writes that Mana wahine embody
sacred feminine power and inherent authority and this power is evident
at Ho‘oulu ‘Aina. Joey Miller, a Ho’oulu ‘Aina forester, describes
the fertility of the valley as wahine in an interview for a video about
Ho’oulu ‘Aina entitled “Ho‘oulu ‘Aina: Healing through Aloha ‘Aina”
(Bezilla 2014).
#e sign at the Ho‘oulu ‘Aina’s entrance reminds all who enter of this
sacred feminine power and authority, embodied as ‘grandmother’.
#e importance of this relationship between mana wahine in the
upland and Ho‘oulu ‘Aina was driven home to me when I heard
Imaikalani Kalahele, declare, “Papa and Wakea are alive in this
place (Ho‘oulu ‘Aina). Something I never knew as a kid.”8 He draws
strength from knowing that Papa and her mate Wakea, the progenitors
of the Hawaiian people, reside in Kalihi Valley.
Opening Protocols: A Welcoming Place of Healing
Work at Ho‘oulu ‘Aina begins and ends with joining hands in a circle.
#e aloha circle begins the day’s work in a ceremony of naming and
remembrance, and the workday ends with a ceremony of gratitude,
the mahalo circle, in which everyone in the circle speaks out loud
concerning something for which they are grateful. #e people in
these circles could be students from local high schools and colleges
ful%lling service-learning requirements; clients, sta* and volunteers
from KKV; or Kanaka Maoli activists engaged in land struggles
enjoying respite from soul-wrenching entanglements with the settler
state. For many in the circles, this is the %rst time that they have been
142
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
asked to re$ect on their relationship to land and community.
#e act of forming a circle is a conscious practice of embodying
aloha. Participants are given the opportunity to focus their attention
on those in the group, be they strangers or family, friends or coworkers.
One sta* member describes participating in the circle thus:
“No one can be invisible, and no one stands above the circle.” Joining
the circle, this sta* member told me, is an invitation to rebuild
relationship to land, to others, and to yourself. #e experience also
asks us to become vulnerable to these connections. #is sta* person
told me that when she %rst volunteered at Ho‘oulu ‘Aina she found
herself arriving late in order to avoid the circle. She felt anxious and
self-conscious about being a haole (white) settler in Hawai‘i. When
she started showing up she was surprised to %nd that being in the
circle alleviated such tensions.
Aloha and mahalo circles are doorways to understanding our collective
kuleana (reciprocal responsibility) to ‘aina and community. #e
Program director, Puni Jackson, told me on community workdays
it is important that everyone stand in the circle to begin the day, but
once the aloha circle breaks, participants are free to choose how they
want to experience the day. At Ho‘oulu ‘Aina, the emphasis is on selfcare,
healing, and learning to work in community.
‘Aina-based healing
#e organization’s executive director, David Derauf, tells the story of
the %rst group of farmers at Ho‘oulu ‘Aina. #ey were Micronesian
women diagnosed with diabetes who had been told they needed to
exercise, a word which did not translate into their native languages:
however, they did know about farming (Caron 2014). #e women
formed Ho’oulu ‘Aina’s %rst community garden group, meeting weekly
in the part of the forest which they named the Pasi%ka agroforest.
Being from di*erent island cultures in Micronesia, they decided
collectively to transform a tangle of invasive trees and underbrush
into an agroforest garden consisting of plants from across the Paci%c.
#ey wanted to create a space that felt like home, a place where they
could learn about each other through the food and medicinal plants
143
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
they would grow at Ho‘oulu ‘Aina (Simeona 2017).
Workday coordinator Darla Simeona tells the story of when the
agroforest received its name. “#e lead Auntie from the group
named the garden Pasi%ka. She was adamant about the spelling
of the name. When I asked why, the auntie responded, ‘that’s
how we take it back.’” She meant, Darla explained, bubbling over
with delight, “we were taking the whole of Oceania back from the
colonizers”(Simeona 2017). Even in its earliest days, Ho‘oulu ‘Aina
was creating self-organizing spaces operating beyond the settlercolonial
pale in which Paci%c Islanders could thrive.
Waiwai
Ho‘oulu ‘Aina operates on the economic principle of waiwai. Wai
is the word for fresh water and the doubling of wai yields waiwai,
the word for abundance and wealth. Hawaiians understand land as
that which feeds us and abundant fresh water as that which creates
wealth. #e economy of Kanaka Maoli society in ‘oiwi wale no
(the time of Kanaka only) was based on creating abundance. In our
time of contemporary Kanaka Maoli resurgence, this ancestral way
of productive organization is called waiwai. Waiwai was not always
practiced at Ho‘oulu ‘Aina. Puni Jackson, Ho‘oulu ‘Aina program
director, recalls that in the early days “people were %ghting about
eggplants — volunteer farmers stealing eggplants from each other”
(Jackson 2016). Fighting over eggplants, Puni observed, is a behavior
that comes from de%cit thinking: believing that we have to hold onto
what we have because there is not enough.
De%cit thinking drives the capitalist market economy that thrives
on manufactured scarcity. In contradistinction, waiwai assumes that
there is and will be enough. Realizing abundance requires generosity,
sharing, and reciprocity. Over the more than a decade that Ho‘oulu
‘Aina has been in operation, waiwai has developed into the dominant
practice. Gardeners no longer steal eggplants from each other.
Instead they work the garden alongside friends and neighbors and,
at the end of community workdays, take home the fruits of their
harvest.
144
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
While hosting a group of health administrators from across the United
States a member of KKV’s sta* articulated what waiwai economics
looks like on the ground. I came upon the group in the Ho‘oulu
‘Aina community garden engaged in an animated discussion about
the way it was organized. A visitor asked why the garden wasn’t
divided into small plots of land that would then be allotted to individuals
to cultivate as they see %t. #e KKV sta*er responded that
organizing the garden in that ‘conventional’ manner creates scarcity.
#ere will never be enough land for all those who want to garden,
and a power structure then arises to manage the scarcity. Community
gardeners, he pointed, out work together under the guidance of
Ho‘oulu ‘Aina sta* to create waiwai or abundance for all, particularly
for those with little access to fresh produce.
Another example of waiwai as transformative social relation occurred
at a third Saturday community workday. At the end of these
workdays the fruits and vegetables harvested that day are put out on
tables for participants to take home. Everyone is encouraged to take
as much as they need for their own table and to share with family
and friends, especially those who would not otherwise have access to
fresh food.
On the day in question, volunteers are “shopping” at the table laden
with the harvest. I am sitting at the registration table eating lunch
with the volunteer coordinator. A young woman approaches our
table with bags of fresh produce and hands me a twenty-dollar-bill,
a gesture I read as payment for the vegetables. I tell her that Ho‘oulu
‘Aina doesn’t take money for the vegetables. #e volunteer coordinator
intercedes, pulling out a small plastic bag with some bills in it.
“We’ll be happy to take your donation though.”
I misrecognized the act of giving and receiving in this incident, but
this misrecognition demonstrates the way that Ho‘oulu ‘Aina has
consciously structured waiwai economics. #ere is no direct correlation
between a twenty dollar bill and the bulging bag of fresh organic
vegetables that the volunteer had helped harvest. #e vegetables are
hers because she showed up and participated. #e volunteer freely
gives twenty dollars in recognition that Ho‘oulu ‘Aina needs cash
145
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
to operate — a very di*erent social relation than the experience of
shopping at a supermarket. Rather than a relationship mediated by
an abstraction (the exchange of money for goods), the relationship
emphasized is between people and the food they harvest from the
land. At Ho‘oulu ‘Aina abundance is dependent on this reciprocal
relationship between humans and other than human existents.
Kanaka Maoli at Ho‘oulu ‘Aina have tapped into the rooted knowledge
of place in order to cultivate a praxis of aloha ‘aina. #e organization
that has emerged out of this work is a kipuka aloha ‘aina.
Kipuka aloha ‘aina are spaces of resurgence that move beyond statecentric
notions of nation-building (Peralto 2018, 101). #is movement
is facilitated by the praxis of embodied aloha ‘aina at Ho‘oulu
‘Aina, a praxis that models preferred futures in which Kanaka Maoli,
immigrants and settlers form a lahui (people) who live and work free
of the colonial structures of oppression, state capitalism, and heteropatriarchy.
Praxis at Ho‘oulu ‘Aina is de%ant indigeneity.
Part "ree: "eorizing Indigenous Ideologies
#inking with Teves’ de%ant indigeneity has been a productive
framework with which to conceptualize the role of Indigenous
ideologies in building Kanaka Maoli futures. As Teves writes, de%ant
indigeneity “constantly deconstructs, resists, and at times recodi%es
itself against and through state logics,” it mobilizes performance of
everyday practice in order to survive and annihilate conditions of
colonialism and reproduces collective forms of “Indigenous being,
belonging, and becoming” (Teves 2018, 11). What does this de%ant
indigeneity tell us about brittle hegemony in the Western liberal state
and the resilience of Indigenous ideologies?
In this section, I discuss the challenges of moving beyond state
hegemony and the role that Indigenous ideologies play in this
nation-building process. Beginning with a critique of Western liberal
democracies, we move into a discussion of the way that Indigenous
ideologies organize resistance, resurgence, and Indigenous nationbuilding,
concluding with a discussion of the ways that indigenism,
anarchism and feminism carry the potential to create conditions for
146
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
radical social transformations.
A Critique of Western Liberal Ideology
Ideologies are maps to navigate social life, helping people adapt to
complex political terrains by articulating relationships and setting
boundaries. Ideologies organize collective desires, beliefs, and ethics
into narratives and symbols that move people to political cohesion
and action. #is article is concerned with the ideologies of Western
European nation-states that colonized the Americas and the Paci%c,
primarily England and Spain and to a lesser degree France, Germany
and the Netherlands. #e principles of this critique could be used to
analyse ideological formations in other geo-political locations.
In the subterranean swirl of social imaginaries, Western liberal democracies
and Indigenous peoples are seemingly incommensurable
constellations. Market economies and notions of who constitutes a
part of ‘civilization’ in Western liberal democracy hinge on the primacy
of human thought and action whereas Indigenous ontologies
are built upon known and unknown ancestral relations. Indigenous
people experience their surroundings as relatives, as partners in the
social life of place, an ideology in which all existents participate in
the making of the world. Indigenous ideologies challenge Western
political ideologies that rationalize as just, good and noble the violence
of colonialism and the exploitation of capitalism.
#is critique of Western liberal ideology draws on Teves’ work with
Althusser’s concept of interpellation, the act of turning towards the
voice of authority, and Žižek’s concept of the traumatic kernel, “the
le'over that cannot be interpelated,” (Teves 2018, 43) in order to
understand how aloha functions to both empower and disempower
Kanaka Maoli. Teves’ analysis of aloha calls attention to the way that
aloha serves as a state apparatus that keeps us tethered to state power
and authority. She writes:
[We] hold onto aloha because we are told it is what
makes us worthy; it shows the value of our culture on
several levels, from a Hawaiian perspective, but also
147
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
through the state, and under Western capitalism and the
Western world that we have all been interpellated into
(Teves 2018, 43).
From my grandparents’ generation to the present, Kanaka Maoli
continue to be interpellated into the Western state while holding on
the best we can to being Kanaka Maoli.
#e state maintains control, Althusser posits, through force and
through manufactured consent. #e repressive state apparatus compels
individuals to adhere to the ruling ideology and ideological state
apparatuses call individuals to participate in institutions that re$ect
the class structure of capitalist society. #e repressive state apparatus
functions predominantly through violence or the threat of violence
to maintain and secure state power. Althusser points out though that
violence and the threat of violence does not guarantee compliance by
the lower classes:
no class can hold state power over a long period without
at the same time exercising its hegemony over and in the
State Ideological Apparatuses (Althusser 2001, 146, emphasis
in original).
He goes on to demonstrate the ways that the repeated performance
of ideological State apparatus rituals reproduce this desire to participate
in the wage labor system (Althusser 2001, 173). #is “ideological
e*ect” imposes on subjects an obviousness “which we cannot fail
to recognize and before which we have the inevitable and natural reaction
of crying out (aloud or in the ‘still, small voice of conscience’):
‘#at’s obvious! #at’s right! #at’s true!’” (Althusser 2001, 172).
Subjects of empire must recognize the authority of the State in order
to be interpellated into it. Teves elaborates:
When the subject turns toward the voice of authority in
an act of interpellation, it is a moment of self-recognition
because we want to become it’s subject, because it provides
us with an identity and security (Teves 2018, 43).
148
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
In the documentary, “#e Perverts Guide to Ideology,” Slavoj Žižek
provides perspective on this question about an individual’s relationship
to ideology.
Ideology is not simply imposed on ourselves. It is our
spontaneous relationship to our social world, how we
perceive its meaning and so on and so on. We, in a way,
enjoy our ideology. To step out of ideology, it hurts. It’s
a painful experience. You must force yourself to do it
(Fiennes 2012).
#e relationship to our social world might feel spontaneous but
Ideological State Apparatuses are continuously working to shape
these relationships.
Western liberal ideology is a powerful force that calls individuals to
participate in the market as free and equal individuals, even though
freedom and equality are severely limited by the circuits of power
controlled by the ruling class. #ose in power manipulate social
structures so that subordinate classes can enjoy the ritual of belonging
to and participating in a civil polity built on empire while obfuscating
the shackles that subjugate that polity to the ruling authority.
As Žižek observes, it is painful to step away from that belonging, to
act on one’s own volition against the dictates of custom. Subjects of
empire are conditioned to feel that they are active agents in empirebuilding
but were/are, at the most, passive powerless observers.
Žižek uses scenes from the %lm “#ey Live” to illustrate this misrecognition
(Fiennes 2012). In the %lm, aliens have embedded secret
messages into the discourse and practices of everyday life. #e
embedded messages are revealed when the main character puts on
special glasses: a %stful of dollars in his friend’s hand becomes a %stful
of notes inscribed with “#is is your God”; a woman seductively
splayed on a billboard becomes the directive “Marry and reproduce.”
#e main character comes to blows with his friend when the friend
refuses to give up his delusion and put on the glasses.
#is is a double delusion, as Žižek explains. “[I]t consists of over149
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
looking the illusion which is structuring our real, e*ective relationship
to reality. And this overlooked, unconscious illusion is what
may be called ideological fantasy” (Žižek 1989, 32–33 Emphasis in
original). #is illusion arises out of humans’ separation from nature.
It is, as Žižek describes, a cle' that leaves a traumatic kernel around
which human culture is built.
All ‘culture’ is in a way a reaction-formation, an attempt
to limit, canalize – to cultivate this imbalance, this
traumatic kernel, this radical antagonism through which
man cuts his umbilical cord with nature, with animal
homeostasis (Žižek 1989, 5 Emphasis in original).
Both Žižek and Althusser universalize their theories on how ideology
works, however they are, I argue, merely re$ecting the e*ect that
ideology has on those who are bound to the hegemony of Western
states. It is these liberal democracies that have cut the umbilical
chord with nature. #e traumatic kernel Žižek references is Western
society’s withered relationship to place, a relationship that has been
overwritten by the totalizing force of colonialism and capitalism.
#e ideologies of Western liberal democracies draw on doctrines like
manifest destiny to rationalize as just, good, and noble the violence
that continues to be perpetrated on Indigenous peoples. Ideologies
provide the fuel to power colonial expansion and capitalist exploitation.
In the settler colonial state, expansion and exploitation are
codi%ed in legal doctrine and “universalized” as cultural norms
and practices that discipline those within its territorial bounds into
hierarchies of domination and repression. Indigenous ideologies are
radically di*erent from these ideologies. Rather than understanding
the land and the ‘other than human’ as exploitable, to be Indigenous
is to experience the land and ‘other than human’ as partners.
Indigenous Ideological Formations
‘Indigenous’ and ‘indigeneity’ become salient political concepts in
the wake of Euro-American empire building and colonial expansion
across the globe. As post-World War Two industrialization and capi150
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
tal accumulation through dispossession intensi%ed, and as discourses
of multiculturalism, hybridity, and homogenization engendered
by the global economy expanded, existential threats to Indigenous
homelands intensi%ed. Indigenous peoples began to organize in
regional and global blocs to counter these existential threats. As this
political mobilization and coalition building progresses, organizers
are discovering shared values and an Indigenous political subject is
emerging in mainstream political discourse (Niezen 2003; Lightfoot
2016).
In a 1990 address to a world conference of Indigenous women,
Haunani-Kay Trask acknowledged this unity in di*erence. In her
speech she emphasized the need for her audience to “fashion new
ways of resisting, of continuing as Native people”(Trask 1999, 108).
She began by acknowledging the di*erent lifeways represented at the
conference. In addition to the geographic di*erences, she noted the
“varied levels of forced assimilation, economic exploitation, religious
missionizing, political and cultural oppression, and physical and cultural
extermination” that participants had experienced (Trask 1999,
102). Her remarks also highlight the fundamental values shared by
the women in the room.
We are all land-based people, and some of us also seabased
people, who are attuned to the rhythms of our
homelands in a way that assumes both protection of and
an intimate belonging to our ancestral places. We have
all been colonized by imperialist powers more or less
resistant to our human needs for self-determination and
self-government. And, at this moment, we face grave
problems that range from environmental poisoning,
nuclear radiation, and high infant mortality to land dispossession,
economic marginalization, and militarization
of our areas. #ese large commonalities have brought us
together as Indigenous women %ghting for our peoples,
our lands, our very survival (Trask 1999, 102).
Trask goes on to expose the multiple ways that neocolonialism
continued to subjugate Indigenous peoples economically and cultur151
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
ally through “brute physical and economic violence” and “skillful
co-optation of cultural forms”(Trask 1999, 103). Indigenous peoples
continue to push back against these totalizing norms and practices
of the state, calling out the systems of authority that are destroying
Indigenous social life in their homelands.
What ways forward are there once these iniquities are understood?
Do Indigenous activists demand that the state recognize Indigenous
rights, return our land, demilitarize our waters? #e politics of
demand and recognition attempts to engage the state within state
structures, but as Corntassel and Alfred argue, the state is a shapeshi
'ing creature that constantly reinterprets laws and agreements
to satisfy the economic and political goals of the colonial project
(Alfred and Corntassel 2005). A growing number of Indigenous
scholars argue against using tactics of demand and recognition as the
primary strategy, claiming that recognition of an Indigenous people
by the state does not lead to true and viable self-determination (L. B.
Simpson 2017; Coulthard 2014; Corntassel 2012).
Indigenous political action must balance a politics of demand that
engages directly with the state and resurgent politics that turns away
from the state. Rights-based arguments come out of the human-centric
notion that land is to be owned and exchanged, that value must
be extracted from all non-human existence. #e material struggle for
land that is tied up in this political reality of land claims and rightsbased
arguments is constantly pulling Indigenous communities away
from the system of reciprocal relations and obligations that humans
share with the land and with all existents.
It is necessary but not su&cient to negotiate for autonomy and Indigenous
rights within state structures. Interventions must be made in
the structural and subjective dimensions of colonial power through
resurgent practices that regenerate Indigenous social relations.
Individuals and communities must “turn away from the assimilative
lure of settler-state recognition”(Coulthard 2008, 201). Corntassel
expands on this concept of Indigenous resurgence:
Being Indigenous today means struggling to reclaim and
152
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
regenerate one’s relational, place-based existence by challenging
the ongoing, destructive forces of colonization.
Whether through ceremony or through other ways that
Indigenous peoples (re)connect to the natural world,
processes of resurgence are o'en contentious and re$ect
the spiritual, cultural, economic, social and political
scope of the struggle (Corntassel 2012, 88).
Individuals who have been assimilated into the ideology of Western
liberal democracies must be called back to the ways of their ancestral
relations. Resurgence requires Indigenous ideological apparatuses
that can break the hold of state apparatuses in order to hail individuals
into subjectivities that act in speci%c ways to reproduce Indigenous
social relations.
In turning away, what are we turning to? Leanne Simpson suggests
that we engage in everyday embodiment of decolonial queer politics
and everyday acts of resurgence which she notes compels individuals
to acts of personal self-determination and freedom. #ese acts of
reclaiming, she notes, move beyond the individual:
But as I’ve witnessed this unfolding in various manifestations,
these individual everyday acts of resurgence are
starting to also become organized and collectivized, and
it is in relationship to each other that we can enact and
renew our political and governing practices (L. B. Simpson
2017, 194).
#ese organized and collectivized everyday acts of resurgence, I argue,
are Indigenous ideologies, the maps that Indigenous peoples are
using to navigate back to grounded relationship to land.
Recognizing kinship to land is the fundamental element in Indigenous
ideologies, as Coulthard reminds us:
#e theory and practice of Indigenous anticolonialism,
including Indigenous anticapitalism, is primarily
inspired by and oriented around the question of land—a
153
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
struggle not only for land in the material sense, but also
deeply informed by what the land as a system of reciprocal
relations and obligations can teach us about living our
lives in relation to one another and the natural world in
nondominating and nonexploitative terms (2014, 13;
emphasis in original).
Coulthard names this system of reciprocal relations and obligations
“grounded normativity,” which encompasses “the modalities of
Indigenous land-connected practices and longstanding experiential
knowledge that inform and structure our ethical engagements with
the world and our relationships with human and nonhuman others
over time”(2014, 13).
Grounded normativity, then, describes a place-based ideology
embedded in an interconnected totality that encompasses the economic,
political, spiritual, and social dimensions of Indigenous life.
Aloha ‘aina is grounded normativity expressed in the Kanaka Maoli
political context.
If Indigenous peoples are to override the power of Western ideological
formations there must be equally powerful voices of authority
interpelating Indigenous subjects into relationship to place. #is
authority comes from ancestral knowledge, values, and beliefs embodied
in the everyday experiences of being ‘of-and-on’ Indigenous
ancestral land. Indigenous ideologies then work to provide political
coherence to the ancestral $ows of knowledge anchored to a speci%c
place and the kinship relationship of humans to that which is ‘other
than human.’ #ese relationships have developed across generations
and, as such, cannot be abstracted into a set of theoretical principles
designed to contain all situations in all places but are, instead, speci
%c to relationships based in speci%c material environments.
Aloha ‘Aina – An Indigenous Ideology
In contemporary Kanaka Maoli society, aloha ‘aina functions as an
ideological formation that calls people into relationship with ‘aina.
#ese relationships become political commitments to counter the
154
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
move by the settler state to discipline Kanaka Maoli into capitalist
social relationships. Hawaiians have a complicated relationship
with aloha. Teves argues that during the stress and social upheaval
of nineteenth-century Hawai‘i, “aloha” was transformed into an
ideological apparatus of the settler colonial state. #is transformation
had its beginnings in a mistranslation by Christian missionaries.
Aloha was translated as unconditional love of God, a meaning Teves
points out that does not track with usage in the time prior to the
arrival of the missionaries. Before the arrival of Westerners “aloha”
was de%ned within an ‘oiwi ontological matrix, not a Christian one.
Citing noted Hawaiian scholars Mary Kawena Puku’i and George
Kanahele, Teves observes:
Aloha thus meant kindness and sharing, especially in the
family or ‘ohana setting where people are welcomed and
all is shared, with the understanding that people gather
to provide mutual helpfulness for collective bene%t. #is
understanding of aloha alongside ‘ohana reiterates the
importance of community and the responsibility that
comes with membership. #is de%nition di*ers clearly
from the missionary translation that turned aloha into a
word focused on a love of God (Teves 2015, 707).
In the (mis)translation of aloha the concept becomes a means to create
a Hawaiian that is malleable to exploitation. Drawing on Althusser’s
theoretical con%guration, Hawaiians are called into a speci%c
kind of Hawaiian subjectivity. Teves writes:
As capitalism became normalized in Hawai‘i and was
practiced as the predominant form of “production”—
when living sustainably o* the land was no longer
possible because many Kanaka Maoli lost their lands to
plantation owners—to cope and adapt to this subjection,
many Kanaka Maoli found opportunity and agency
through the performance of culture. Participation in
such activities, however, lent credence to the notion that
the only value Kanaka Maoli had was their ability to perform
aloha and that such performances were “natural,”
155
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
indicative of who we used to and should be. Aloha, then,
became, through ritualized performance, an expression
of Hawaiian cultural di*erence (Teves 2015, 710).
#e ‘aloha state’ apparatus interpellates Hawaiians into a subjectivity
that supports the hegemony of settler society. It becomes obvious to
haole settler and Hawaiian alike that to be Hawaiian is to perform a
speci%c kind of aloha. “Aloha and Hawaiianness,” Teves writes, “are
then collapsed in the interest of quieting political dissent and facilitating
capitalist development” (Teves 2015, 715). #e ‘aloha state’ is
an ideological apparatus that maintains state power and reproduces
labor power for the settler economy. Aloha is a powerfully paradoxical
concept that is both exploited by settler society and emblematic
of who we are as Kanaka Maoli (Teves 2018, 42–43). To counter
this paradox, Kanaka Maoli activists are now qualifying aloha with
phrases like aloha ‘oia i‘o (true aloha) or in tropes like “%erce aloha
not doormat aloha.”
Aloha, in conjunction with ‘aina, is an Indigenous ideology that
organizes collective desires, beliefs, and ethics into a narrative that
provides political cohesion for Kanaka Maoli, calling Kanaka Maoli
into reciprocating relationship to the world around them. Although
‘aina is commonly translated as land, it is not real estate. Derived
from ‘ai’-- to eat -- the word is glossed as that which feeds. Aloha
‘aina, then, is an abiding care for the land and all that feeds us.
Aloha ‘Aina crystalizes into ideological discourse in nineteenthcentury
political activism. #is is when the Hui Hawai‘i Aloha ‘Aina
(Hawaiian Patriotic League) and the Hui Hawai‘i Aloha ‘Aina o Na
Wahine (Women’s Hawaiian Patriotic League) formed. #ey organized
immediately a'er a group of haole businessmen toppled the
government of the Indigenous monarch. “#roughout the struggle,”
Noenoe Silva writes, “Kanaka Maoli who worked to hold onto the
sovereignty of their own nation called themselves ‘ka po‘e aloha
‘aina’ (the people who love the land).” (Silva 2004, 130–31) In the
a'ermath of the insurgency the Hui mounted a vigorous campaign
opposing annexation of Hawai‘i by the United States. Reading every
issue of Ke Aloha Aina, a Hawaiian language newspaper published
156
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
from 1895 to 1920, Silva unearthed the Kanaka Maoli response to
the American empire. “#e Kanaka,” she writes, “had fought the
overthrow and annexation with everything they had, and especially
with discourse.”(Silva 2014, 304)
During this period, Joseph Nawahi, who in addition to publishing
Ke Aloha Aina was a prominent member of the Hui Hawai‘i Aloha
‘Aina, expressed what aloha ‘aina meant for the Kanaka Maoli:
Alaila, o ke aloha i kou makuahine, kou aina, kou wahi i
hanauia ai, oia ka mea e loihi ai na la, na makahiki o ke
ola ana. [#us, love for your mother, the land, the place
where you were born, that is what will make the days
and years of your life long.] (Silva 2004, 140)
#e nationalism of ka po‘e aloha ‘aina was and still is grounded in
our connection to the land, the source of our sustenance even as
the illegal annexation of the archipelago to the United States forced
Hawaiian nationalism underground.
Aloha ‘aina as a political organizing discourse arises again in the
latter half of the twentieth century. Hawaiians began agitating for
access to culturally signi%cant lands and, eventually, for a return of
lands stolen from Kanaka Maoli when the United States annexed
Hawai‘i. In 1987, Trask marked this transformation of Kanaka Maoli
political consciousness when she observed:
By 1976, the language of protest had changed from
English to Hawaiian, with emphasis on the native relationship
to land. #e cultural value of Aloha ‘Aina (love
of the land) was to characterize the demands of protesters
into the 1980s. By then, the Movement had branched
out politically to link up with American Indian activists
on the mainland, anti-nuclear independence struggles
throughout the South Paci%c, and international networks
in Asia and at the United Nations (Trask 1987, 126–27).
#e Hawaiian political movement for self-determination and sov157
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
ereignty matured over the ensuing decades and aloha ‘aina is now a
discourse and set of practices that organizes a diverse Kanaka Maoli
community to resurgent praxis and political action.
Cultivating Interlocking Ideologies
Ideological apparatuses centered in grounded normativity like aloha
‘aina are necessary for Indigenous nation building. #ese Indigenous
ideological apparatuses arise out of everyday acts of resurgence,
hailing both individual members of Indigenous communities back
to ancestral social relations and calling potential allies who have no
genealogical connection to a given place to join in the radical transformation
of colonial, economic and gendered axes of oppressions.
Indigenism, anarchism, and feminism are interlocking approaches to
un-do these multiple axes of oppression; indigenism against colonial
power, anarchism against state power, and feminism against heteropatriarchy
(Lasky 2011, 4). Process and relationship are key elements
in the practice of resistance in all three and each engages in radical
activism outside of state structures. #ese theoretical frameworks are
re$ected in real life projects on the ground.
Noelani Goodyear-Ka‘opua sees a parallel between kuleana, “a
Hawaiian notion intertwining authority and responsibility,” with
notions of authority put forth by anarchist theorist Mikhail Bakunin
(Goodyear-Ka‘opua 2011, 147). #is concept of anarchism, she notes,
recognizes two forms of authority appropriate for human societies:
“1) the power of natural laws, and 2) voluntary authority and subordination
that shi's between people dependent upon context and
an individual’s expertise”(Goodyear-Ka‘opua 2011, 148). Goodyear-
Ka‘opua demonstrates that kuleana of Kanaka Maoli to ‘aina and
community o*ers a means to build “post-imperial futures that
carve autonomous spaces outside of the capitalist, private property
system”(Goodyear-Ka‘opua 2011, 155). #e interlocking ideologies
underscore “the ways people recognize the authority within
themselves”(Goodyear-Ka‘opua 2011, 131). #ey work in tandem to
o*er a promising theoretical frame from which to consider decolonial
futures in which “protocols for interaction and solidarity across
di*erences of race, gender, sexuality, class, nationality, and other
158
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
forms of identi%cation” create a&nities across di*erence that can
transform the settler state (Goodyear-Ka‘opua 2011, 132).
At Ho‘oulu ‘Aina and its parent organization, Kokua Kalihi Valley
Comprehensive Family Services, indigenism, anarchism and
feminism work together to cultivate a new and vibrant approach to
community healthcare. #e synergistic relationship between Kanaka
Maoli values and practices and community-based, community-run
health care models Indigenous futures that carry the potential to
radically transform social and political structures in Hawai‘i from
the ground up.
Coda
As I %nalize this article for publication, the United States is reeling
from the e*ects of the Covid-19 global pandemic. Early on, as
the infection spread from Asia to Europe to North America, Dallas
Goldtooth posted this on Twitter:
Let me get this straight: Europeans are banned from
coming to America because of their chance of spreading
disease amongst the population?? Well ain’t that some
shit? - Says every Native in America (@Dallas Goldtooth
7:55am 12 March, 2020).
Goldtooth’s observation is a biting commentary regarding the e*ects
of pandemics on the Indigenous peoples of the Americas.
On April 28, 2020, I woke from %tful, anxious dreaming with these
words on my tongue, “#ings fall apart, and we put them back
together again.” #e phrase gave me some measure of comfort for it
does seem that in every corner of the planet things are falling apart.
#e virus has stripped away the veil. In real time we witness the best
of us working together, thinking through ways to maximize collective
survival in a horrifying human situation, while the worst of us
pro%t from the situation with little regard for collective futures.
Social breakdown is not new or unusual for Indigenous communities.
It was not so very long ago that viruses were weaponized by
159
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
white settlers to break down Indigenous social orders and eliminate
them from the American landscape. #ere are lessons to be learned
from the many Indigenous nations who continue to survive the
ongoing trauma of empire: lessons about caring and community and
paying attention to the land beneath our feet, the air surrounding us./
And then, on May 25th, 2020, as Covid-19 raged across the United
States, George Floyd was murdered by a police o&cer in the presence
of bystanders who videotaped the horror while begging to let
the man go. Videos of the murder went viral and the smoldering
pandemic of white supremacy in the United States erupted onto the
streets and into the halls of government, precipitating a peoples’ uprising
against racism and white supremacy across the Global North.
Collectively held ideologies determine our actions and reactions to
events around us. How will the call of Ideological State Apparatuses
hold up in this time of physical and social pandemics? In Western
liberal democracies, Ideological State Apparatuses protect wealth
production for the ruling elite above all else. #is has led to demands
to reopen the United States economy even as the pandemic rages,
infection rates soar, and the death count grows. And in response to
protestors’ calls to address the pandemic of murders of people of
color at the hands law enforcement, the state answers by increasing
the presence of law enforcement. When Ideological State Apparatuses
cease to be e*ective in quelling dissent, the response is to amplify
the repressive state apparatus.
Indigenous, anarchist, and feminist ideologies value relationships
and communities. Indigenous nations, particularly those deeply engaged
in resurgent praxis, have deep and abiding relationships with
the land. #eir very existence and resilience de%antly pushes against
the appartuses of the state. Mutual aid, personal responsibility, and
community building are touchstones of anarchist and feminist
ideologies. In this time of Covid-19 and white supremacy pandemics,
these communities and networks are also pushing against state
apparatuses and learning to build resilience from within.
In Our History Is the Future: Standing Rock versus the Dakota Access
160
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Pipeline, and the Long Tradition of Indigenous Resistance, Nick Estes
writes of the resilience of Indigenous nations, which he likens to the
mole burrowing underground hidden from view, in constant motion,
conspiring for freedom with “the collective faith that another
world is possible” (Estes 2019, 19). In this moment of physical (virus)
and social (racist) pandemics there is much to be learned from
this Indigenous resilience. As Estes observes:
It is from everyday life that the collective con%dence to
change reality grows, giving rise to extraordinary events
(Estes 2019, 19).
#e extraordinary events Estes references are moments of courage
and committment in the defence of Indigenous lifeways, like the
%ght at Standing Rock to protect the waters of the Missouri from the
Dakota Access Pipeline.
Conditions seem ripe for extraordinary events to occur. Are conditions
right for the networks of mutual aid and care scattered
throughout the United States to build common cause with the Indigenous
nations that co-exist within it? Can they work in tandem to
force this state to address systemic inequities? By the time this article
is published the world will probably be evolving into some kind of
‘new normal’. I am hopeful that the grounded normativity expressed
in everyday acts of resurgence and resistance that we have witnessed
within anarchist, feminist and Indigenous circles will have pointed
our social life towards one built on reciprocal responsiblities to place
and all existents therein.
Notes
1 ‘Aina is land and is derived from ai meaning to feed. ‘Aina is o'en glossed as that
which feeds.
2 Kanaka Maoli refers to people who are native, indigenous, aborigine, genuine,
true, real, actual. I use the terms Kanaka Maoli, Native Hawaiian, and Kanaka
‘Oiwi to refer to descendants of the %rst people of these islands. I also use the
terms maoli and ‘oiwi as adjectives to signify ‘derived from the %rst people.’ (Puku‘i
1991)
3 Lo‘i are ponds where the Hawaiian staple kalo (taro) is cultivated.
4 Ahupua‘a are land divisions usually extending from the uplands into the ocean
161
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
nearshore and determined by geographic features and available resources.
5 ‘Oiwi wale no was introduced by Young and expanded upon by Goodyear-
Ka‘opua to emphasize “the foundational nature of seventeen centuries of settlement
and societal development by Native Hawaiian kupuna before foreign arrival”
(Young 1998, 20; Goodyear-Ka‘opua 2013, 250, note 1).
6 #e %ndings in this section are based on %eldwork between August 2015 and
March 2018. I remind readers that like any living entity, priorities, programs and
personnel have shi'ed over the years at Ho‘oulu ‘Aina.
7 Mana wahine are female deities that embody sacred feminine power and inherent
authority. See (Silva 2007; McDougall 2016).
8 #is statement was made during a meeting of volunteers and sta* at Ho‘oulu
‘Aina, December 2015.
References
Alfred, Taiaiake, and Je* Corntassel. 2005. “Being Indigenous:
Resurgences against Contemporary Colonialism.” Government and
Opposition, Politics of Identity - IX:, 40 (4): 597–614.
Althusser, Louis. 2001. “Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses
(Notes towards an Investigation).” In Lenin and Philosophy and Other
Essays, translated by Ben Brewster, 85–126. London: Monthly Review
Press.
Bennett, Frederick Debell. 1970. Narrative of a Whaling Voyage
Round the Globe from the Year 1833-1836. Bibliotheca Australiana ;
No. 46-47. Amsterdam, New York: NIsrael; Da Capo Press.
Bezilla, Jean. 2014. “Ho‘oulu ‘Aina: Healing #rough Aloha ‘Aina.”
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bsd066v_EAc&feature=youtu.
be.
Caron, Will. 2014. “A Holistic Approach to Health.” #e Hawaii Independent:
A Digital Newsmagazine. June 2, 2014. http://hawaiiindependent.
net/story/a-holistic-approach-to-health.
Cooper, George, and Gavan Daws. 1990. Land and Power in Hawaii:
#e Democratic Years. Pbk. ed. Honolulu, Hawaii: University of Hawaii
Press.
Corntassel, Je*. 2012. “Re-Envisioning Resurgence: Indigenous
162
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Pathways to Decolonization and Sustainable Self-Determination.”
Decolonization: Indigeneity, Education & Society 1 (1). http://www.
decolonization.org/index.php/des/article/download/18627.
Coulthard, Glen. 2008. “Beyond Recognition:Indigenous Self-Determination
as Pre%gurative Practice.” In Lighting the Eighth Fire: #e
Liberation, Resurgence, and Protection of Indigenous Nations, edited
by Leanne Simpson, 187–203. Arbeiter Ring.
———. 2014. Red Skin, White Masks: Rejecting the Colonial Politics
of Recognition. Minneapolis: Univ Of Minnesota Press.
Estes, Nick. 2019. Our History Is the Future : Standing Rock versus the
Dakota Access Pipeline, and the Long Tradition of Indigenous Resistance.
Brooklyn, NY: Verso.
Fiennes, Sophie. 2012. #e Perverts Guide to Ideology. https://youtu.
be/Pk8ibrfXvpQ.
Goodyear-Ka‘opua, Noelani. 2011. “Kuleana Lahui: Collective Responsibility
for Hawaiian Nationhood in Activists’ Praxis.” A$nities:
A Journal of Radical #eory, Culture, and Action 5 (1). https://ojs.
library.queensu.ca/index.php/a&nities/issue/view/572.
———. 2013. #e Seeds We Planted: Portraits of a Native Hawaiian
Charter School. First Peoples: New Directions in Indigenous Studies.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Hamamoto, Mark H., David D. Derauf, and Sheryl Yoshimura. 2009.
“Building the Base: Two Active Living Projects #at Inspired Community
Participation.” American Journal of Preventive Medicine 37 (6,
Supplement 2): S345–51.
Ho‘oulu ‘Aina. n.d. “Home.” Ho‘oulu ‘Aina. Accessed February 2,
2020. http://www.hoouluaina.com/.
Jackson, Puni. 2016. Ho‘oulu ‘Aina Interview 1.Audio recording.
Johnson, Kahala, and Kathy E. Ferguson. 2019. “Anarchism and
163
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Indigeneity.” In #e Palgrave Handbook of Anarchism, edited by Carl
Levy and Matthew S. Adams, 697–714. Cham: Springer International
Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75620-2_39.
“Ka Papa Lo‘i ‘o Kanewai: Our Purpose.” n.d. Ka Papa Lo‘i ‘o
Kanewai. Accessed June 9, 2020. https://manoa.hawaii.edu/hshk/kapapa-
loi-o-kanewai/our-purpose/.
“Kamehameha Schools - Bernice Pauahi Bishop’s Will and Codicils.”
n.d. Accessed March 13, 2019. http://www.ksbe.edu/pauahi/will.php.
Kame‘eleihiwa, Lilikala. 1992. Native Land and Foreign Desires:
Pehea La e Pono Ai? Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.
Kent, Noel J. 1993. Hawaii: Islands under the In%uence. Honolulu:
University of Hawaii Press.
Kokua Kalihi Valley website. n.d. “Home - Kokua Kalihi Valley.”
Kokua Kalihi Valley. Accessed February 1, 2020. https://kokuakalihivalley.
squarespace.com/.
Lasky, Jackie. 2011. “Indigenism, Anarchism, Feminism: An Emerging
Framework for Exploring Post-Imperial Futures.” A$nities:
A Journal of Radical #eory, Culture, and Action 5 (1). https://ojs.
library.queensu.ca/index.php/a&nities/issue/view/572.
Lightfoot, Sheryl R. 2016. Global Indigenous Politics: A Subtle Revolution.
Routledge.
Maile, David Uahikea. 2019. “Resurgent Refusals: Protecting Mauna
a Wakea and Kanaka Maoli Decolonization.” Hulili: Multidisciplinary
Research on Hawaiian Well-Being 11 (1): 57–69.
McDougall, Brandy Nalani. 2016. “Wondering and Laughing
with Our Ancestors: Mana Wahine and the Mo‘olelo of
Hi‘iakaikapoliopele.” Marvels & Tales 30 (1): 26–44.
McGregor, Davianna. 2007. Na Kua’aina: Living Hawaiian Culture.
164
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Niezen, Ronald. 2003. #e Origins of Indigenism: Human Rights and
the Politics of Identity. Berkeley, Calif. ; London: University of California
Press.
Palama, Francine. 2005. “Native Hawaiian Cultural Impact Assessment:
Kalihi Valley Nature Park Project. Kalihi Ahupua‘a, Kona District
Island of O‘ahu. TMKs:1-4-14-01 &-26, 1-4-16-03.” #e Active
Living Center, Kokua Kalihi Valley.
Peralto, Leon No‘eau. 2018. “Kokolo Mai Ka Mole Uaua O ’I: #e
Resilience & Resurgence Of Aloha ‘Aina In Hamakua Hikina,
Hawai‘i.” PhD Dissertation in Political Science, Honolulu Hawai‘i:
University of Hawai‘i at Manoa.
Poepoe, Joseph Mokuohai. n.d. “Na mea kaulana o ka lipolipo o
Kalihiuka.” Bishop Museum Archive.
Pualani Kanaka‘ole Kanahele. 2003. “Native Hawaiian Environment.”
In Wao Akua: Sacred Source of Life. Honolulu, Hawai‘i: Division of
Forestry and Wildlife, Dept. of Land and Natural Resources.
Puku‘i, Mary Kawena. 1991. Hawaiian Dictionary: Hawaiian-English,
English-Hawaiian. Rev. and enl. Ed. Honolulu: University of Hawaii
Press.
Shilliam, Robbie. 2015. Black Paci&c: Anti-Colonial Struggles and
Oceanic Connections. Bloomsbury Academic.
Silva, Noenoe K. 2004. Aloha Betrayed: Native Hawaiian Resistance
to American Colonialism. American Encounters/Global Interactions.
Durham [N.C.]: Duke University Press.
———. 2007. “Pele, Hi‘iaka, and Haumea: Women and Power in
Two Hawaiian Mo‘olelo.” Paci&c Studies 30 (1/2): 159–81.
———. 2014. “Ke Ku‘e Kupa‘a Loa Nei K/Makou (We Solemnly Pro165
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
test): A Memoir of 1998.” In A Nation Rising: Hawaiian Movements
for Life, Land, and Sovereignty, edited by Noelani Goodyear-Ka‘opua,
Ikaika Hussey, and Erin Kahunawaika’ala Wright, 303–11. Durham:
Duke University Press Books.
Simeona, Darla. 2017. Ho‘oulu ‘Aina Interview 5.
Simpson, Leanne Betasamosake. 2017. As We Have Always Done:
Indigenous Freedom through Radical Resistance. 3rd ed. edition. Minneapolis:
Univ Of Minnesota Press.
Teves, Stephanie Nohelani. 2015. “Aloha State Apparatuses.” American
Quarterly 67 (3): 705–26. https://doi.org/10.1353/aq.2015.0046.
———. 2018. De&ant Indigeneity : #e Politics of Hawaiian Performance.
Chapel Hill: Univerity of North Carolina Press.
Trask, Haunani-Kay. 1987. “#e Birth of the Modern Hawaiian
Movement: Kalama Valley, O’ahu.” #e Hawaiian Journal of History
21 (1): 126–53.
———. 1999. From a Native Daughter: Colonialism and Sovereignty
in Hawai‘i. Rev. ed. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Young, Kanalu G. Terry. 1998. Rethinking the Native Hawaiian Past.
Native Americans (Garland Publishing, Inc.). New York: Garland
Pub.
Žižek, Slavoj. 1989. #e Sublime Object of Ideology. Phronesis. London
; New York: Verso.

Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Anarchisms Otherwise: Pedagogies of
Anarco-Indigenous Feminist Critique
Macarena Gómez-Barris*
How might we approach the relationship between anarchism and
feminism as a response to the continuing structures of racialized
gendered violence central to the horizon of our radical imaginaries?1
How might we re-envision anarchisms in creative and generative
ways, as an experience that thwarts the project of intimate, state, and
corporate violence that depends upon the extraction of the racialized
female/sexed body for its expansion?2 Learning from the work
of U.S. Native feminisms, Black feminisms and women of color
feminist theories in the Global North, as well as anarcho-Indigenous
feminisms and praxis from the Américas allows us to address longstanding
issues of how to historicize gendered violence within the
matrix of coloniality and the modern nation state.3
In this essay I frame ‘anarchisms otherwise’4 -- modes of relationality
that step across the masculine archive of anarchistic activity towards
experiential, embodied, and phenomenological modes of organizing
below and against the activities of the state. !ese anarchisms otherwise,
as I discuss elsewhere, challenge genealogies of anarchistic
activity that do not consider the essential role of social reproduction
and invisible work within the matrix of colonial power or the rou-
* Macarena Gómez-Barris is a scholar and writer who works at the intersections
of art, environment, feminist-cuir politics, and decolonial theory and praxis. She
is the author of four books, Where Memory Dwells: Culture and State Violence
in Chile (2009), !e Extractive Zone: Social Ecologies and Decolonial Perspectives
(2017), Beyond the Pink Tide: Art and Political Undercurrents in the Américas
(2018), and Towards a Sociology of a Trace (2010, with Herman Gray). She is
completing a new book on the colonial Anthropocene, At the Sea’s Edge: Liquidity
Beyond Colonial Extinction (Forthcoming Duke University Press 2022). She
is Founding Director of the Global South Center (see globalsouthcenter.org),
and Chairperson of Department of Social Science and Cultural Studies at Pratt
Institute, Brooklyn. Macarena was a Fulbright fellow in 2014-2015 at the Sociology
and Gender Department in FLACSO Ecuador, Quito. She is co-editor with Diana
Taylor of Dissident Acts, a Duke University Press series.
120
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
tinized condition of violence that extends from the intimate to the
nation-state and beyond.5 More directly, they forget how the Indigenous
female body and embodiment is a site of on-going war by the
state, and how anarco-Indigenous feminists use their bodies as a site
of counter-attack.
!e ‘otherwise’ here points to disruptive, anti-normative, and decolonial
activities that makes for individual and collective action,
dissident acts that accrue meaning across time and space a"er
colonialism. By attending to modes of organizing from within the
Américas that address authoritarianism, heteropatriarchy, colonialism,
and capitalism, we begin to imagine what a politics of liberation
looks like that stretches far beyond one horizon of activity. And, by
focusing on the #gures of female laborers and social movement leaders
dating from the colonial period into modernity, we extend the
largely male anarchist archive that imprisons stories of Indigenous
and Black women’s experiences as well as forms of denouncement
and insurgent solidarities that do not always show up within the
social movement archive.
!ough Andean history has been described as a permanent space of
insurrection by Steven Sándor John and others,6 anarchism itself is
o"en code for Occidental and Western European forms of social organization.
Narratives of uprisings and horizontal activity o"en run
through genealogies of male anarchist events that occlude female
participation. What anarchisms otherwise emerge to delink from
European historiography? To frame this question in this way allows
us to enter into the anarchisms from the Indigenous Global South. In
particular, I draw from #gures within Andean history in the Américas
that have been the touchstones for twentieth and twenty #rstcentury
feminist anarchist organizing e$orts.
I brie%y turn to how research and activisms have built upon a decolonial
feminist history towards new social formations. Mujeres
Creando Comunidad was founded by Julieta Paredes, Maria Galindo
and Monica Mendoza in 1985 during the “transition to democracy”
period in Bolivia and at a time of hyperin%ation in the nation during
the onset of privatization and deregulation: the period described as
121
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
neoliberalism.7 !ough this group split into two di$erent feminist
groups a"er the co-founders went their own ways in 2002, the feminist
anarchic vision and trans-feminist perspective poses a meaningful
challenge to patriarchy, coloniality, and to the many forms that
nationalism takes. During the neoliberal period when corporate
restructuring in%uences political agendas in unprecedented ways,8
and the coercive power of intimidation and violence has intensi#ed
dispossession and lack of freedoms, looking to anarchist, feminist,
Indigenous activisms from the Global South o$ers us a window into
important practices of refusal.
My invitation, then, is for an expansive critical perspective that,
through Indigenous-anarchist-feminist critique, places the histories
of colonialism and capitalism within the epistemic disobedience
of decolonization. In these imaginaries of anarchistic sociality,
submerged feminist and queer perspectives become the organizing
nodes of horizontal relation. !ese modes of activity provide a dual
track that at once denounces colonial modes of governance and
authority, and also imagines and makes new worlds outside of the
intimate, public, and state logics of coercion.
Figures of Decolonial History: From Cholas to Pailliris
During the early part of the twentieth century, as in many other
Latin American nations, Bolivian middle-class and elite women
formed cultural groups and pushed for educational rights that were
the #rst to create public visibility around gender concerns, such as
the educational work of Adela Zamudio, a female anarchist who
taught in many formats. !rough organizations such as “El Ateneo
Feminino,” these groups facilitated dialogues within national public
spaces about the existence of gender inequality, the #ght for su$rage
rights, and resistance against discrimination.
Elite women o"en focused on literary salons and su$rage rights following
European models. As working class mestizas and Indigenous
women entered the labor market in vast numbers during industrialization,
they initially organized themselves to improve their material
and labor conditions. As Lourdes Zabala details in Mineras, Cholas,
122
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
and Feministas/ Miners, Cholas, and Feminists (1976-1991), during
the twentieth century anarchism became the route for many kinds
of Indigenous labor activism (1993). As women organized with
men to achieve the eight-hour workday, to liberate prisoners, and
to improve wages, they also developed a speci#cally anti-state and
feminist agenda (Zabala 29). Indeed, the story of female Indigenous
political visibility during Bolivian modernity is one that emerges in
#ts and starts and has to be uncovered through the history of powerful
Indigenous female #gures and working class mestizas on the one
hand, and the more hidden histories of anarchism, on the other.
During capitalist expansion, rural to urban migration produced dramatic
racial and labor segmentation within La Paz’s social fabric. !e
Chola market woman, an Indigenous and mestiza #gure, increasingly
participated in spheres of commercial exchange as a powerful and
visible presence that organized, sold, and bartered through systems
that were not always legible to capitalism. Of Aymara descent, and to
a certain extent urbanized, the chola accrued representational visibility
as a mediator of cultures, and, within literature and imagery, as an
icon of the Bolivian nation (Poole 1997). Yet, the chola was also the
target of anti-Indigenous racism by the European elite that wanted
to construct their own modernity. Importantly, these women managed
to retain many of the social and economic features of Indigenous
Andean societies, such as the horizontal kinship structure of
the Incan system, the ayullu that was the mainstay of Indigenous
society, even a"er the onset of colonialism. For example, as scholars
have rightly noted, these rhizomatic structures supported %exible
and mobile tactics that were used during the anti-state gas and water
wars in the early 2000s. Yet what has been underplayed is the degree
to which chola market women maintained horizontal structures of
decision making and bartering in ways that predate Western anarchist
formations. For instance, as powerful brokers of market spaces,
Chola women control the substrates and localized economic spaces
that have not been fully colonized by neoliberal privatization and
deregulation.
During the early part of the 20th century until the present day,
Indigenous women continue to wear traditional polleras (Indig123
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
enous skirts and petticoats), o"en facing workplace discrimination
for cultural practices that included wearing Indigenous clothing in
public. Since the 1920s, cholas have impressively intertwined labor
concerns with anti-racist work, anti-state politics, market organizing,
and anti-discrimination e$orts through an embodied practice and
reinvention of Indigenous cultural forms. As Lourdes Zabala details,
Chola market women challenged upper-class women on issues such
as “couple violence and the need for a new morality, the defense of
free love, absolute divorce, and the rejection of civil marriage,” pushing
towards a new feminist agenda. An important early marker of
feminist di$erence in Bolivia, then, was the separation between oligarchical
feminist movements and chola anarchist organizing, a #ssure
that cracked open during the #rst Feminist Convention in 1929
that aimed to bring together female constituencies to address gender
inequity and su$rage issues. Following the convention, the presence
of female leadership all but disappeared from the national scene. In
part, the disappearance of female public visibility was due to splits in
feminist alignments. But more importantly, during the next several
decades of national politics, as revolutionary forces increasingly
consolidated around a Marxist hegemony, feminist anarchist #gures
all but disappeared.
For instance, the 1952 Socialist revolution led by the Movimiento
Nacional Revolucionario (MNR) that nationalized Bolivia’s resource
wealth, did little to register signi#cant levels of female membership.
Aymara sociologist and activist Sylvia Rivera Cusicanqui has
threaded together how the history of anarchism was contained and
obscured by both a le"ist Marxist hegemony and a statist revolutionary
process. As she explains:
What happened in Bolivia is that there have been two
o&cial histories: !e o&cial history written by the
[Revolutionary] Nationalist Party--MNR--that basically
denies all the agency of both workers and peasants and
Indigenous peoples; and the o&cial history of the Le"
that forgets about anything that was not Marxist, thus
eclipsing or distorting the autonomous history of anarchist
unions. It’s the links between the anarchists and
124
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
the Indigenous people that gave them another nuance,
because their communities are self-sustained entities and
they basically are places where anti-authoritarian type of
organization can take roots.9
Indeed, anarchist feminisms were essentially written out of Le"ist
o&cial history. As Cusicanqui emphasizes, this erased “Anarcho-Indianism-
Feminism because the chola #gure, the women, the female
#ghter, the female organizer, are all part of Bolivian daily life” (ibid).
!ese femininities function as the less noted genealogies of what is
otherwise touted in decolonial scholarship as the region’s permanent
insurrection, wherein the Andes serves as an idealized space for the
abstractions of the “multitude,” once again writing out Indigenous
anarco-feminist presences.
Female miners also regularly engaged in horizontal and anti-state
tactics against the post-revolutionary authoritarian state, thus playing
a profound role in the opening of democracy in Bolivia. During
the late 1960s and 1970s, when a series of nationalist and authoritarian
regimes took power, Indigenous female miners emerged as
protagonists combating new extreme political and economic conditions
— this culminated in a hunger strike in 1978 accompanied by
global shows of solidarity. !e lesser-known story of mining is the
degree to which women and children have bolstered the work of the
“mining family” at home, while laboring in the slag piles, recycling
the toxic materials of mining extraction. !ousands of women and
children have historically worked as slag pile workers of the mining
industry, living with the toxicity of million-ton heaps of contaminated
waste that this extractive industry produces. Mining surplus,
then, depends upon the Indigenous heterosexual mining family,
something female activists realized when they shi"ed their attention
from seeing themselves as serving a perfunctory role toward understanding
their centrality in the reproduction of the mining economy.
In June Nash’s classic We Eat the Mines and the Mines Eat Us, she
interviews the Aymara leader Domitla Chungara about how female
laborers began to understand the emergence of a feminist anarchist
consciousness around issues of labor. While organizing began as
125
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Housewives Committee work, it evolved into understanding female
laborer’s place in the global economy. Hunger strikes in this context
became an important tactic against rendering women’s social reproductive
labor invisible and also against their colonial condition. To
sum up this genealogy then, like the chola anarchist women before
them, the poorly paid palliris, or slag pile workers, opened up spaces
for visibility and a discursive terrain of struggle into otherwise masculine
geographies.
Anarco Feminism Now
Mujeres Creando Comunidad has worked to push back on archival
erasure by building upon these activist inheritances. Victoria Aldunate
Morales describes what it means to do the daily work of anarchist
feminisms: grounded in particular traditions and genealogies of
female struggle, the work is done through the making of “collective
experiences, reasoning through the body, and elaborating an never
ending %ow of ideas, concepts, categories, proposals, images, that
gives a new vision to feminists and other women . . . [!is requires
an] opening one’s eyes in ways that cannot be closed again, either
from oneself or in relation to the female eye.”10 !ese references to
the realm of vision are not just about seeing coloniality directly, but
about how to sense and live the future through a communal solidarity
of the now. Besides this shi" in the colonial gaze, another signi#-
cance of Mujeres Creando Comunidad has been its ability to build
from the ayullu horizontal structures to create feminismo communitario,
or communal feminisms that emerge out of feminist-anarchist
pasts and organize the imaginary of future a&nities.
As Julieta Paredes advocates, Indigenous women must also #nd new
sources of relation with other women through a communal feminism
that works outside of the ideology of chachawarmi. !ough
gender complementarity was o"en rhetorically invoked by Evo Morales
as a discernible and positive model of gender equality, wherein
masculine and feminine roles have separate but parallel spheres
of accountability, Paredes discusses how, in practice, chachawarmi
represents a vertical gender model that can only be broken down
through new horizontal networks. As a way to grasp the multivalent
126
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
criticalities at work here, anarchic feminisms challenge Indigenous
traditions, while Aymara cosmologies help decolonize and rearrange
the meaning of feminisms.11
During the 1990s gra"tis, or las pintadas -- signature political quotes
written in distinctive cursive writings on city walls -- became an important
format that illustrated how Mujeres Creando perforated the
dominant visual #eld. As visual disobedience, the gra"tis painted an
Indigenous anarchist feminist imaginary onto the urban landscape
by marking terrain not through any capitalist indication, such as real
estate speculation or the building of new infrastructure or signs of
gentri#cation, but instead through the embodied political improvisation
of the written word.
My favorite message among many memorable gra"tis is: “Ní Dios,
ní amo, ní marido, ní partido, Mujeres Creando,” “Not God, nor boss,
nor husband, nor Party, Women Creating,” with the sign for female
crossed through with an “A for Anarchy” at the end of the script.
!is gra&ti strikes through the cityscape with its simultaneously
insistent refusal of heteronormativity; Indigenous nationalism; and
national party politics, o$ering instead the promise of “Mujeres Creando”
(Women Creating) as an open invitation to the viewer.
I visited and engaged with Mujeres Creando Comunidad over the
course of several visits between 2011 and 2015, and I #rst visited the
site of Maria Galindo’s radio program, and the café run by local Aymara
and Quechua women, in 2013. When I walked into the crowded
two-story colonial house, where lunch patrons were tucked into
their wooden tables busy eating steaming bowls of Andean potato
quinoa soup, I was visually overwhelmed by an enormous, gorgeous
photographic image plastered onto the adobe wall of an indigenous
woman with braids. Below her was a question -- “What does racism
look like to you?” -- and a statement -- “End Racism.” Having
worked within the #eld of Latin American culture and Ethnic Studies
for over twenty years, this was the #rst time that I was literally
silenced by a powerful image that outed Anti-Indigenous racism in a
public venue.
127
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Maria Galindo’s radio shows, video work, performances, and ongoing
writing on decolonization all carry a decidedly direct critique of
Andean patriarchy, Catholic morality, Morales’ extractivist politics
and neoliberal agenda, and what I can only describe as a ‘punk anarchist’
“fuck you” attitude. Unlike my interviews with Paredes, who
was somewhat more tempered in her analysis of Morales’ government,
Maria Galindo was much more critical, calling his politics
liberal-multicultural, paternalistic, and regressive, and showing
visible contempt for the “Aymara path to Andean socialist” rhetoric.
In this regard, Maria Galindo’s e$orts, alongside Mujeres Creando,
include an important critique of the 2011 Plurinational Constitution
that Morales rati#ed through a series of regional and, later, national
assemblies.
As I discuss in Beyond the Pink Tide: Artistic and Political Undercurrents
(2018), at the level of legal infrastructure, the Plurinational
Constitution made important gains, namely for multi-lingualism
and Earth-centered rights. However, Le" governments backtracked
on their protection of Indigenous territories and actually expanded
infrastructures for extractive capitalism. In my mind the Feminist
Constitution is the single most important contemporary anarchistfeminist
Indigenous critical document.12 Born from consultation
through assemblies within the nexus of recent sex positive rights
discussions as well as ‘push back’ against the morality of colonial
Catholicism and the rhetoric of tradition and family, the Feminist
Constitution is, by turns, surprisingly poetic, raging, collaborative,
and performative. It represents a parallel constitutional compliment
to its more well-known counterpart on Earth Rights. And it inserts
reproductive rights; feminist, queer and trans rights; and protections
for sex workers as well as women and children working in economies
of social reproduction; as key to the project of decolonization.
As one of the gra"tis reads, “No se puede decolonizar sín depatriarcalizar”
(“You cannot decolonize without dealing with patriarchy”).
!is anti-colonial, anti-capitalist, anti-patriarchal ‘triple threat’
analysis encapsulates the signi#cance of the Indigenous Feminist
Anarchist critique. !is slogan addresses the heart of land-based
and resource concerns in Bolivia: they are intimately connected with
128
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
the structures of colonial capitalism and their gendered and sexed
histories of exclusion.
Notes
1 For a longer and more detailed discussion of Anarco-Indigenous Feminisms, see
Chapter Five of my book !e Extractive Zone: Social Ecologies and Decolonial Perspectives,
Durham: Duke University Press, 2017. See !eresa Warburton, “Coming
to Terms: Rethinking Popular Approaches to Anarchism and Feminism” (January
13, 2017):
https://anarchiststudies.org/coming-to-terms-rethinking-popular-approaches-toanarchism-
and-feminism-by-theresa-warburton/.
2 Here I draw on an analytic about this relation from my book !e Extractive Zone.
3 On Native and Indigenous feminisms, see especially work by J. Kehaulani Kauanui,
Mishuana Goeman and Jennifer Nez Denetale (2008), and Joanne Barker
(2017). For intersections with queer theory, see Jodi Byrd (2017) and Leanne
Betasamosake Simpson (2018).
4 !is is an investigation as part of work with a reading group involving Saidiya
Hartman, Jayna Brown, Jack Halberstam and myself. We began our study together
in July 2018.
5 On the matrix of colonial power see Anibal Quijano, “Coloniality of Power, Eurocentrism,
and Latin America,” in Nepantla 2000, pp. 533-580.
6 See S. Sándor John’s book, Bolivia’s Radical Tradition: Permanent Revolution in the
Andes, Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 2005.
7 Bolivia experienced a series of false democratic transitions in the late 1970s and
early 1980s that resulted in a military dictatorship (1980-1982) and culminated
with the second Hernán Siles Zuazo presidency. !is tumultuous time of hyperin-
%ation, increased urban and rural labor radicalization, and state violence made the
formation of Mujeres Creando that much more necessary.
8 See Fernando Leiva on his concept of “the ‘new spirit’ of capital in Latin America”
(2015).
9 http://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/silvia-rivera-cusicanqui-andalusia-knollindigenous-
anarchism-in-bolivia,
10Mujeres Creando Comunidad Blog Site, http://memoriafeminista.blogspot.
com/2010/04/3-edicion-del-libro-hilando-#no-desde.html, accessed January 12,
2019.
11 In what I #nd to be a somewhat problematic discussion of the politics of charchawarmi
in the gender equality debates in Bolivia, Anders Burman analyzes
the issues of Aymara silence as an o"-found trait of Aymara Indigenous women
(2014). While their line of inquiry is not dissimilar to my own concerns around
coloniality, tradition, and decolonization, we come to di$erent conclusions about
the impact of feminist radical histories in Bolivia. In part, this di$erence is the
product of Burman’s over-reliance on political narratives and ethnographic observations
that position Aymara feminisms within and against a frame of Western
feminisms that cannot identify the arc of a utopic horizon. Feminist-Indigenousanarchic
critique has its own regional genealogies that need not be compared to
129
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
other forms of gender analysis or liberal feminism. !ey are, #rst and foremost, an
intersectional project of decolonization.
12 Because of its importance, we translated Maria Galindo’s “Political, Feminist
Constitution of the State: !e Impossible Country We Build as Women Feminist
Constitution,” a document by Mujeres Creando that revises the Plurinational
Constitution to include gender/sex di$erence and perspectives as a manifesto.
We translated the document from Spanish into English for the Decolonial Gesture
issue of E-mísferica: See, https://hemisphericinstitute.org/en/emisferica-11-1-decolonial-
gesture/11-1-dossier/constitucion-politica-feminista-del-estado-el-paisimposible-
que-construimos-las-mujeres.html, accessed March 1, 2021.
References
Alfaro, Raquel, “Mujeres Creando Comunidad: Feminización de la
Comunidad,” Bolivian Studies Journal, Revista de Estudios Bolivianos,
15-18, 2008-2010.
Barker, Joanne, Ed., Critically Sovereign: Indigenous Gender, Sexuality
and Feminist Studies, Durham: Duke University Press, 2017.
Betasamosake Simpson, Leanne, As We Have Always Done: Indigenous
Freedom through Radical Resistance, Minneapolis: Minnesota,
2017.
Burdette, Hannah A., Futurismo arcaizante: descolonización y anarcofeminismo
en De Cuando en Cuando Saturnina, 2011.
Burman, Anders, “Chachawarmi: Silence and Rival Voices on Decolonization
and Gender Politics in Andean Bolivia,” Journal of Latin
American Studies, 43: 65-91, 2011.
Byrd, Jodi, “Loving Unbecoming: !e Queer Politics of the Transitive
Native,” in Ed. Joanne Barker’s Critically Sovereign: Indigenous
Gender, Sexuality and Feminist Studies, Durham: Duke University
Press, 2017.
Flores Galindo, Alberto, In Search of an Inca: Identity and Utopia in
the Andes, New Haven: Yale University, 2010.
130
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Galindo, Maria, “Feminist Constitution,” republished in E-misférica,
edited Gómez-Barris, Macarena, Marcial Godoy-Anativia and Jill
Lane, Eds. Decolonial Gesture, E-misférica, 2014.
Goeman, Mishuana R. and Jennifer Nez Denetale, “Introduction:
Native Feminisms: Legacies, Interventions and Indigenous Sovereignties,”
Wacazo Sa, Volume 24, Number 2, Fall 2009, pp. 9-13.
Kauanui, J. Kehaulani, Hawaiian Blood: Colonialism and the Politics
of Sovereignty and Indigeneity, Durham: Duke University Press, 2008.
Gómez-Barris, Macarena, Marcial Godoy-Anativia and Jill Lane,
Eds. Decolonial Gesture, E-misférica, 2014.
Gómez-Barris, Macarena, !e Extractive Zone: Social Ecologies and
Decolonial Perspectives, Durham: Duke University Press, 2017.
Gómez-Barris, Macarena, Beyond the Pink Tide: Artistic and Political
Undercurrents in the Américas, Berkeley: University of California
Press, 2018.
Lugones, Maria, “!e Coloniality of Gender,” Worlds and Knowledges
Otherwise, Spring 2008.
Lugons, Maria, “Heterosexualism and the Colonial/Modern Gender
System,” Hypatia, January 9, 2009.
Mignolo, Walter, !e Idea of Latin America, New York: Blackwell
Publishers, 2005.
Nash, June, We Eat the Mines and the Mines Eat Us, New York: Columbia
University Press, 1992.
Paredes, Julieta, Hilando Fino y Feminismos Comunitarios, Mujeres
Creando Comunidad, 2013.
Pérez, Emma, !e Decolonial Imaginary: Writing Chicanas Back into
History, Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1999.
131
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Perez, Laura E., “Enrique Dussel’s Etica de la liberación, US Women
of Color Decolonizing Practices, and Coalitionary Politics Amidst
Di$erence,” Qui Parle: Critical Humanities and Social Sciences,
Spring/Summer 2010.
Poole, Deborah, Vision, Race and Modernity: A Visual Economy of
the Andean Image World, New Jersey: Princeton University Press,
2007.
Postero, Nancy, Now We are Citizens: Indigenous Politics in Postmulticultural
Bolivia, Palo Alto: Stanford University Press, 2007.
Quijano, Anibal, “Colonialidad del poder: eurocentrismo y américa
latina,” 2000.
Said, Edward, Orientalism, New York: Vintage Books, 1978.
Sanjines, Javier, Mestizaje Upside Down: Aesthetic Politics in Modern
Bolivia, Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2004.
Spedding, Allison, De Cuando en Cuando Saturnina, La Paz: Mama
Huacha Publications, 2005.
Valencia, Sayak, “Interferencias transfeministas y pospornográ#cas
a la colonialidad del ver,” in Eds. Macarena Gómez-Barris, Marcial
Godoy-Anatavia and Jill Lanes’ Decolonial Gesture, E-misférica special
issue, 11: 1, 2014.

Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Indigeneity, Sovereignty, Anarchy:
A dialog with many voices
Gord Hill and Allan Antli!*
!is discussion between Kwakwaka’wakw carver, graphic artist, and
anarchist sovereigntist Gord Hill and anarchist activist, archivist, and
art historian Allan Antli" was conducted from Victoria, Canada,
located in southern Vancouver Island on the unceded territories of the
WSÁNEC & Lekwungen (Songhees & Esquimalt) peoples, and Yalis
(Alert Bay, Cormorant Island), part of the unceded territories of the
Kwakwaka’wakw Namgis Nation. Unceded Kwakwaka’wakw territories
encompass northern Vancouver Island and its island archipelago, as
well as the adjacent mainland of British Columbia. !e dialog includes
other voices, past and present, who have addressed the issues the two
discuss.
AA: Gord, I proposed we discuss the impact of Indigenous knowledge
and activism on the broader anarchist movement in the territories
encompassing ‘Canada’, including historical involvement in
Indigenous struggles on the part of non-Indigenous anarchists from
the 1980s through to today. Much of this history intersects with our
own lives by way of shared participation in various actions as well as
*Gord Hill is a member of the Kwakwaka’wakw nation. In addition to numerous
zines and articles, Hill is author of three widely-read illustrated histories: !e
Antifa Comic Book: 100 Years of Fascism and Antifa Movements (2018); !e Anti-
Capitalist Comic Book: From the WTO to G20 (2012); and 500 Years of Resistance
Comic Book (2010; revised and expanded ed., 2021). He maintains the Warrior
Publications website -- warriorpublications.wordpress.com – “to promote warrior
culture, "ghting spirit, and resistance movements.”
Allan Antli! is Professor of Art History and Visual Studies at the University of
Victoria. He is author of Anarchist Modernism: Art, Politics, and the First American
Avant-Garde (2001), Anarchy and Art from the Paris Commune to the fall of the
Berlin Wall (2007), and Joseph Beuys (2014). Antli! is also editor of Only a Beginning:
An Anarchist Anthology (2004) and Director of the University of Victoria’s
Anarchist Archive. In addition to serving as editor of ADCS, he is art editor for the
interdisciplinary U.K.-based journal, Anarchist Studies.
100
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
through anarchist and Indigenous publications: in fact, I was reading
your "rst zine, Endless Struggle (1987-1990), as well your "rst Indigenous-
focused journal, Oh-Toh-Kin (1992-1994) when they came
out in the late 1980s and early 1990s.1 In the 1980s you were also in
Vancouver, British Columbia and knew people involved with the
anarchist journals No Picnic (1988-1990), Open Road (1976-1990), as
well as the Anarchist Black Cross.2# Were you reading anarchist publications
that occasionally featured Indigenous writers and artists,
including you, such as Bulldozer/Prison News Service (1980-1997)
and Kick It Over (1981-2001)? Can you comment on how Indigenous
perspectives were shaping anarchist conceptions of social/ecological
liberation in the late 1980s?
GH: Well, I was reading journals such as Bulldozer and Kick It Over
in the late 1980s but there wasn’t a lot of Indigenous writers contributing
to these, I think Bulldozer probably had more content from
Indigenous prisoners, POWs (prisoners of war) and political prisoners.
# Certainly, I do recall that Indigenous struggles had a fairly
prominent place among anarchists in Canada in particular during
this time, and some of that had started I believe with the arrest of
Leonard Peltier3 in British Columbia and his subsequent deportation
trial which occurred in Vancouver. A number of American
Indian Movement (AIM)4 members had come to the city for this
and overall, I think the anarchists responded with a lot of solidarity
and helped provide some resources for Peltier’s defense team. $ere
was also an incident with Dino Butler & Gary Butler (Confederated
Tribes of Siletz)5 which involved a RCMP6 police car chase and their
arrests in Vancouver in 1981, a%er which they became embroiled in
several years of court and while in prison they began doing hunger
strikes to demand that they have access to traditional ceremonies
such as the pipe and sweat lodge, and this also saw anarchists providing
a lot of solidarity. . .
And around this same time period I think there was a greater emphasis
on ecological struggles within some sectors of the anarchist
movement, and if you look at some of the communiques from the
guerrilla group Direct Action7 that appeared around this time you
can see the in&uence of this to a certain extent with the concept of
101
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Indigenous anti-colonial resistance and the defending of Indigenous
territories. $ere were also some Indigenous peoples that were involved
in the anarchist movement in Vancouver and this was partly a
result of the previous campaigns of solidarity anarchists had carried
out with Indigenous resistance movements. And this was to a certain
extent a departure from a lot of what the anarchist movement
was really focused on during this time, where you had some strong
‘workerist’ type currents that really looked to the Spanish Revolution
(1936-39)8 as the starting point for any kind of anarchist revolutionary
movement... whereas I think the association with Indigenous
struggles had a profound impact on non-Indigenous anarchists in
Vancouver, and also at this time Vancouver had a vibrant anarchist
movement including the journal Open Road, which had a very large
distribution and some in&uence on the larger anarchist movement
internationally... and then by the late 1980s you had journals such as
Reality Now coming out of Toronto which had a very strong focus
on Indigenous struggles and this kind of solidarity has pretty much
continued to this day in Canada. . . .
AA: For sure, solidarity with Indigenous struggles was central for
many non-Indigenous anarchists in Canada during this time. Re-
&ecting on that, I would like to share some statements from Reality
Now no. 6 (1986) that document how those involved in that journal
were thinking through the relationship between anarchism, colonialism,
and indigeneity.# First, two passages, one from a collective statement,
“What We Aim to Do,” and the second from a leading article,
“Never Give Up:”
Our focus on many Native struggles is based on the
belief that the Native people of North America also have
much to o!er. Native people have the longest history of
struggle on this continent, from the time the Europeans
landed and began their destructive practices here until
the present. As such, we have much to learn from them
about belief, resistance, survival, and dedication. Much
of the philosophy the Native people of North America
try to live is based on a deep connection and respect for
our Mother Earth. What we have to o!er them is our
102
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
solidarity and our dedication and respect for this land. 9
And further, in a self-re&exive statement calling on readers to rebel
against North American industrial capitalist nation states and learn
how to prioritize “the earth”:
We must learn how to heal the earth, in the clearest and
most e!ective ways, in the short time that we have. We
must be able to see the di!erence between life-positive
and life-negative actions and e!ects. Our existence is life,
but our support for the death merchants carries a heavy
toll – the increasingly devastating impact of the power
and death culture. It perpetuates emptiness in our own
lives and the violence to, and destruction of, our people.#
We are a part of the Almighty Amerikkkan Imperialist
Machine, and contribute to the genocide of our own
people . . . In a true sense we dig each other’s graves.10
$e same issue features a special section, “Native News,” that covers
a plethora of resistance struggles and actions.11 $ere are also a number
of articles addressing Indigenous issues, including “$e Case of
Leonard Peltier”12; “$e Deafening of Labrador” (on Innu resistance
against NATO military jets conducting low-lying &ight exercises in
their territories)13; and “$e Screaming in Our Hearts,”14 calling for
people to support Indigenous resistance at Big Mountain15 against
strip-mining for coal on Navajo and Hopi lands.
$is last article is particularly revealing. It declares the pending destruction
of Indigenous lands integral to Navajo and Hopi cultures a
“Crime of Genocide” and states “the Earth cannot a!ord to lose these
voices, the voices of the Indigenous peoples who continue to live
in harmony with the Earth.”16 It also observes that Hopi prophecies
teach what climate experts are warning against: that “such mining
and ecological destruction would cause shi%s in the weather systems
of the entire world.”17 Another Big Mountain-related article – “$e
Eagle Takes Wind” -- records the journal entries of ‘David” chronicling
a “journey into the occupied territory of the United States:
a part of what is known as Turtle Island.”18 David and two other
103
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Toronto anarchists connect with various anarchist communities and
resistance movements until arriving at the “Big Mountain Survival
Camp” to “meet comrades [most non-Indigenous camp members
are anarchists] and Indians and talk about plans and support for
their struggle.”19 David seeks to “"nd a synthesis between animal
liberation and the Native struggles and their lifestyles” by volunteering
to help a Navajo family tend to their sheep and learning from
them.20#He notes the di!erences between the Navajo’s relationship
with animals, which is “in harmony with the planet,” and factory
farming.21 David also participates in butchering a sheep for food and
the cleaning up a%erwards. He writes, “I’ve had a chance to explain
why I don’t eat meat and, as well, about my anarchist politics. We
agree on a good amount.”22
Gord, could you comment on the engagement from Reality Now
with Indigenous struggles/ perspectives? Are they on the right track?
Are there lessons here for anarchists in the 2000s?
GH: Yes, I think Reality Now was on the right track. At the time they
were one of the only anarchist journals & groups to seriously place
Indigenous struggles at the forefront of resistance & acknowledged
the reality of colonialism. I think they were in&uenced by the anarchist
movement in Vancouver, which in turn had been profoundly
in&uenced by the Leonard Peltier extradition case & the solidarity
movement that arose around that. Members of Reality Now also were
deeply involved in the struggle of the Lubicon Cree23 in northern
Alberta and, with the “Friends of the Lubicon,” helped to carry out
a successful boycott of Daishowa,24 and some members carried out
this work for many years. I think in some ways they were ahead of
their time and really contributed to the level of solidarity being expressed
with Indigenous struggles today, such as the Wet’suwet’en,25
Six Nations,26 etc. So today I believe that non-Indigenous anarchists,
whether they realize this or not, are in many ways continuing this
type of solidarity work that people around Reality Now laid the
groundwork for.
AA: I recall the Reality Now collective’s engagement with the Lubicon
Cree’s struggle against oil exploitation, pipeline building, and
104
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
logging in their unceded territories. Building on relations with the
Lubicon Cree established while they were publishing Reality Now
in the late 1980s, Reality Now collective member Kevin $omas and
others who had been visiting Lubicon Cree territory formed the
Toronto-based “Friends of the Lubicon” in 1988 to launch a boycott
campaign and legal challenges to Daishowa Inc.’s clearcutting.27
You mentioned the anarchist Direct Action group, which blew up a
hydro substation on Texada island (unceded Tla’amin territories)28
and a cruise missile guidance system plant in Toronto, among other
things.29 $ey were part of a network that included another outstanding
example of anarchist/Indigenous relationship building
you mention, the journal Bulldozer. Bulldozer was sent to prisoners
across North America and served as a venue where they could share
their visions, struggles, and art with other prisoners and the world
beyond prisons. A lot of the contributors were Indigenous, as you
state. A%er the Direct Action group was arrested during a commando
style police ambush outside Vancouver in January 1983, the
Canadian State intensi"ed its focus on the anarchist movement with
harassment, verbal threats, and raids. Bulldozer was targeted with a
warrant empowering the police to seize material intended for its next
issue. $e collective regrouped and put out that issue in summer
1983, despite the raid.30 It included letters, statements, and artwork
from Indigenous prisoners, “Vancouver Five for Life” by two members
of Direct Action,31 “Anarchy Can’t Fight Alone” by imprisoned
Black Panther anarchist Kuwasi Balagon,32 “Survival Network,”33 by
the editors of Bulldozer, and “Against the Corporate State,” by Gary
Butler.34
As you’ve noted, Butler had been involved in the Vancouver anarchist
scene with his cousin, Dino, during the early 1980s. “Against
the Corporate State” was written from a Medium Security Prison in
Bath, Ontario. Butler opens characterizing the Canadian government’s
arrest of Direct Action activists as an “attack on the human
race.” $e Canadian State has accused them of “terrorist acts” and he
responds by inverting the accusation:
I cannot agree with this allegation because I know for a
105
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
fact my friends were not a part of this insane government,
nor members of the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted
Police), nor part of Kaplan’s secret service agents.35 $erefore,
I declare in the name of the people, my friends
should be freed. In Toronto, on June 13th, ’83, more of
my friends and associates were attacked and charges laid.
Bulldozer is an international publication for people on the
outside to see and read of the numberless injustices done
to the people caged in human workhouses across the land
and a chance to educate the people about who are in these
workhouses and why they were put there. . . . Bulldozer
put out many statements for men and women throughout
the hemisphere, gave us inside these dungeons a sense
of compassion, of unity, of solidarity --- when we could
read this publication. . . . I’ve been in for many years and
Bulldozer is by far the best publication for us inside. Our
voice can be heard through words. Our struggle inside is
not a forgotten one. It comes as no surprise to me that the
enemies would do whatever they have to do to intimidate,
threaten, terrorize and imprison and yes, crazy as it may
sound, even neutralize, to get what they want.36
In the same edition of Bulldozer the editors state:
Mother Earth is in deadly peril. All life upon her is threatened
by the rapid deterioration of the eco-systems of our
Mother by maximum growth economy which assumes
that the resources of Mother Earth are unlimited . . . To
achieve maximum growth these economic systems must
have ever-increasing amounts of land and resources. $is
has meant genocide of the Indigenous people as they are
living on their traditional lands and they become a threat
to the powers of industry and war is declared upon them.
Realizing this, it is understandable that resistance of the
Indigenous peoples is in the forefront of the battle for
survival . . . It is not for humanity to rise above Nature,
humanity is Nature . . . we must learn to cooperate and
live in solidarity with Nature, through systems of mutual
106
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
aid, appropriate technology and tribal-community workplace
autonomy . . . We are concerned with the survival of
Mother Earth and her children, so we are seeking to build
a network of support of land and survival struggles, to organize
on-site support in the form of food, clothing, and
supplies; to maintain communications with and between
various struggling peoples; and to organize support for
those who are jailed in resistance.37
What I detect here is solidarity premised on foregrounding the resistance
of Indigenous peoples in defence of their territories, cultures,
and ways of being as the critical nexus in a battle for survival that is
global, a battle founded on a basic truth that indigeneity embodies --
“humanity is Nature.” Hence, when the Canadian State attacks Direct
Action, it attacks defenders of “the human race,” in Butler’s words.
Do you have any thoughts to share about strategies for building and
sustaining this type of mutual solidarity?
GH: I think these statements speak for themselves and they are even
more true today than in the past as we see the impacts of environmental
destruction & climate change over the past 30 years or so.
Again, I think the non-Indigenous anarchists of this generation,
the late ‘70s up to the mid-80s, were ahead of their time and were
fairly advanced in their analysis of the western industrial system,
of capitalism as well as colonialism. And I think today we see some
of that vision coming into reality, such as the mass movement that
arose around Indigenous opposition to the Dakota Access Pipeline38
in the United States, or the one that arose in solidarity with the
Wet’suwet’en opposition to the Coastal Gaslink pipeline in northern
British Columbia (see endnote 20).# In this way I believe these anarchists
and anti-authoritarians, a term many preferred at this time,
contributed to the movements we see arising today. $eir politics
were maintained through the 1990s, by which I mean the centering
of Indigenous resistance & ecological struggles, and of course that
decade began with the Oka Crisis of 1990,39 which further expanded
the ideas of anti-colonial resistance & solidarity with Indigenous
peoples’ struggles.
107
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
AA: You’ve played no small part in sustaining and building this
consciousness through your publications, your art, and your leadership
working with non-Indigenous anarchists in Canada and beyond
through the 1990s and 2000s. To take one example, in 2003, the
International Olympic Committee (IOC) declared the 2010 Winter
Olympics would be hosted by Vancouver. $is decision ignored an
“O'cial Complaint” submitted to the IOC in 2002 by representatives
of the Interior Salish St’t’imc and Secwepemc peoples whose
traditional territories have, like the rest of the province of British
Columbia, never been surrendered through treaties with the colonizing
British Empire or the Canadian government. $e IOC was
told the Interior Salish St’t’imc and Secwepemc peoples40 exercise
sovereignty and stewardship over “diverse ecosystems including highly
sensitive alpine areas” and that an obligation to protect land and wild
life is integral to Indigenous cultures and “traditional knowledge.”41
2010 Olympics-related sports developments, which would disturb a
hitherto untouched mountain valley habitat (home to grizzly bears,
mountain goats and other animals) in Interior Salish St’t’imc territory,
went against the IOC’s so-called commitment to environmentally
sustainable games and were part-and-parcel of British Columbia’s
and Canada’s on-going colonialist violation of Indigenous
sovereignty.42 While the Olympic bid was on, radicals in Vancouver
had organized against it, but you took resistance to the next level
once the Vancouver Olympics were declared. You came up with the
double-edged slogan, “No Olympics on Stolen Land” (and its o%-
used variant, “No Olympics on Stolen Native Land”), which asserted
Indigenous sovereignty by criminalizing the Canadian state for land
the%.43 And you played a leading role organizing a cross-Canada
Olympics Resistance Network (ORN) -- with a ‘home base’ in Vancouver
-- infused by your anti-authoritarian analysis of the statecapitalist
nexus,44 in which Indigenous sovereignty and ecological
responsibility toward the land were understood as indivisible. Could
you comment on how, during the lead up to 2010, non-Indigenous
anarchists stepped up to participate and how anarchist infrastructures
– I am thinking of print-based and internet-based media to
spread the message, venues where workshops could be held, networking
for actions, that sort of thing – aided your e!orts?
108
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
GH: Anarchists played an important role in the anti-2010 Olympics
campaign. Many participated in the Olympic Resistance Network
(ORN), which organized public education events such as workshops
and seminars, as well as rallies & direct actions. Anarchists also
carried out dozens of clandestine direct actions including arson attacks
and other sabotage of Olympic corporate sponsors. During the
Olympic Games in February 2010 anarchists organized autonomous
actions including the 2010 “Heart Attack” rally, which featured a
sizeable black bloc and some property destruction in the downtown
shopping & "nancial district.45 As far as infrastructure & media,
anarchists published a number of zines against the Olympic industry
including communiques from direct actions. $e anarchist social
space “12th & Clark”46 hosted numerous events leading up to the
games, and during the Olympics there was an impressive multi-media
space established through the Vancouver Media Co-op, much of
it organized by Submedia,47 which featured videos as well as a daily
newsletter (Balaclava).48
AA: I’d like to discuss Mel Basil’s concept of anarchy as it relates to
indigeneity. We both know Mel. He is Gitxsan49 and Wet’suwet’en,
and he identi"es as an anarchist and an Indigenous sovereigntist. I’d
like to share some passages from a talk he gave at the Victoria Anarchist
Bookfair in 2012. At the time he was deeply involved with the
Unist’ot’en camp (endnote 25), which he helped initiate:
All peoples in the world were Indigenous at one point.
All peoples come from an Indigenous origin: a beautiful
origin! An origin where human beings were closely
related to the world around them. And colonization
has impacted each one of us to some degree or another:
violations run deep. Many of you may feel that colonization
impacted you much longer ago. For us, it’s maybe a
couple of hundred years that colonization has impacted
our peoples. And, yes, it has been very deep because it
came along with genocide, with ecocide…
We saw a great hope at our recent camp in August,
August 6-10, at the Unist’ot’en camp in our territories.
109
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
What I intimated with all the anarchists that came to our
community, into our camp, was ‘you’ve taken that step
of decolonization, denying the colonial state and looking
at your own lives, and how you want to live your own
life.’….
$e elders in our territories in our communities have
shown us for thousands and thousands of years how to
live on our territories. We do not decimate the territory.
We do not over-"sh, we do not over-hunt. And we made
mistakes over those thousands of years. $at’s why we
have trickster legends. We have trickster legends telling
us what mistakes our ancestors made which transformed
the world around us. So, in a trickster legend, it looks
like the world transformed because of their mistakes
[in few days’ time] when, really what happened was . . .
when our ancestors broke Natural Laws, this had consequences
. . . over thousands of years. So, trickster legends
developed over thousands of years of observation of our
interactions with the natural world around us. One of
the most important Natural Laws I’ve learned from trickster
legends and from people that showed us how to live
is: take what you need and leave the rest. Unfortunately,
Capitalism, Corporatism, and Democracy don’t understand
that concept: Capitalism says, ‘I want it all and I
want it now.’…
In traditional societies, we take responsibilities. In
our language, our word for ‘Law’ is the same word we
have for ‘Responsibility.’ $e way we say that is “‘anuc
niwh’it’ën”50 and how I see that with anarchy, and what I
say about anarchy, is that anarchy wishes for social order,
but not at everybody else’s expense. Nobody else should
feel degraded because you’re comfortable. Everybody’s
equal, you organize horizontally . . . Traditional societies
are no di!erent….
I’m not going to tell myself that I’m decolonized. I’ve
110
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
freed my mind, I’ve kept a freed mind, [but] I’m still
impacted [by colonization]. I am not decolonized. Now
why I say that is because settler society also must get a
sense of what decolonization is – and you’re on that path
as anarchists. You’ve taken that step to decolonize. . .How
does that relate to Indigenous societies? [In] traditional
societies, you [as an outsider must] ask permission to be
on our land. On our territory, in our camp, everybody
went through a protocol, but it wasn’t police standing at
the bridge telling you [that] ‘you have to ask us for the
right to be here.’ We didn’t say that. We stood there very
openly and welcoming, but stern -- not cold, not really
warm, but [asserting, as sovereign Indigenous people in
our territory], ‘I’m not going to get erased. I’m not going
to get bulldozed. I’m not going to get railroaded.’ At the
same time [we indicated]: ‘I’m thankful you are here.
$is is the protocol we’re going to go through "rst.’ Before
you enter the territory [you need to] not just to state
you need permission "rst. You’re asking the chiefs: ‘how
can we share responsibility to be on the land?’ Sharing
responsibilities, sharing the Law: self-regulation. To me
that totally relates to anarchy…
I should add that Mel underlined non-Indigenous anarchists at the
camp had much to learn from Indigenous peoples if they were to
dismantle the capitalist industrial economy they grew up under and
establish a right relationship with the natural order.
Mel’s conception of anarchy and its relationship to indigeneity as
well as paths to decolonization reminds me nineteenth-century European
anarchists grounded their opposition to state-based industrial
capitalism on the idea that humanity needs to construct a social
order attuned to the natural order, to realize freedom through the
a'rmation of natural law, beginning within ourselves.51 As Russian-
American Emma Goldman put it in her statement, “Anarchism:
What it Really Stands For,” “natural law is that factor in man which
asserts itself freely and spontaneously without any external force, in
harmony with the requirements of nature.”52 $is, and Mel’s asser111
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
tion of Indigenous sovereignty as the path toward free federation
that could encompass non-Indigenous settler-based society, strikes
me as a transformative basis for movement building as a dismantling
of colonialism: aligning non-Indigenous anarchism with Indigenous
sovereignty in a manner that aids and abets the growth of anarchy
in Indigenous and non-Indigenous communities. What do you
think? It strikes me that the trajectory of non-Indigenous anarchism
in Canada that we have been discussing leads to this point, when
anarchist-Indigenous leadership comes to the fore.
GH: I agree with Mel’s observations and the concept that Indigenous
sovereignty is a path towards liberation from the state & capital, not
just for Indigenous peoples but for non-Indigenous people as well.
Indigenous peoples & cultures have survived through centuries
of European colonization and can serve as models of mostly nonhierarchical,
non-authoritarian forms of social organization.# $ese
were societies organized without any centralized state or authority,
and which lived in balance with the natural world. $e main things I
would add to this are that Indigenous societies were not just a collection
of individuals grouped together but were, and are, comprised of
extended family units. $is gives the community very strong bonds,
stronger in many ways than intentional communities which come
together based on ideology, etc. And these Indigenous communities,
for the most part, provided a great degree of personal freedom
& autonomy but at the same time there are many rules or regulations
about what is appropriate behaviour.# And I say this because I
think some non-Indigenous anarchists have the view that the most
important thing is their personal freedom & autonomy, while in
Indigenous societies this is counter-balanced with the overall safety
& security of the collective, or community. Many of these rules, or
protocols, around personal conduct are based in traditional culture.
$en there is the matter of hereditary leaders & the role they played
in the traditional social organization, something that would be. I
think, somewhat alien to the broader anarchist movement. . . . For
example, among many Indigenous nations there are territories that
are claimed by families or clans & only individuals from these groups
are permitted to gather resources from them, such as salmon or berries.
So while indigenous sovereignty & culture can serve as a model
112
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
for an autonomous & de-centralized society there are some aspects
of it that are di!erent from what we "nd in anarchist self-organization,
and a part of this is the fact that anarchists for the most part
form intentional communities that do not include a larger extended
family forming the basis of that community.
AA: $anks for your thoughts Gord, and for all you’ve contributed
to the movement.
113
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Notes
1 $ese and other publications mentioned in this discussion are housed in the
Anarchist Archive, University of Victoria: https://www.uvic.ca/library/featured/
collections/anarchist/about/index.php. (Assessed 05/11/2020) For histories of
many of the journals under discussion, see Allan Antli!, ed. Only a Beginning: An
Anarchist Anthology (Vancouver: Arsenal Pulp, 2004).
2 $e Anarchist Black Cross organization dates to the early 20th century. Originally
formed by Russian radicals to support Russian political prisoners during the
reign of the Tsar, its scope broadened with the rise of fascism during the 1920s and
30s to encompass anarchist political prisoners of many ethnicities, as well as those
incarcerated in the Soviet Union. $e organization continues its work to this day.
See “About Us,” Anarchist Black Cross Federation: http://www.abcf.net/about-us/
(Assessed 09/09/2020)
3 American Indian Movement (AIM) member Leonard Peltier (Anishinabe, Dakota,
and Lakota Nations) was caught up in a Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
armed assault on a ranch on $e Lakota Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota
on 25 June 1975, in the course of which two FBI o'cers and one AIM member
were killed. Subsequently, Peltier &ed to Canada seeking asylum. He was arrested
in Canada in February 1976 and underwent a four-week extradition hearing in
Vancouver, British Columbia, where anarchists rallied around his defence. In the
end, Peltier was extradited to the United States, where he was tried on trumped
up charges concocted by the FBI and sentenced on 19 April 1977 to two life terms
in prison, to be served consecutively. He has remained in prison ever since. $e
International Leonard Peltier Defense Committee homepage has extensive documentation
related to Peltier’s plight: https://www.whoisleonardpeltier.info/home/
about-peltier/activist/(Assessed 20/09/2020)
4 AIM was founded in 1968 to "ght for recognition of Indigenous sovereignty and
to demand the United States government adhere to its treaties with Indigenous
nations. On the movement’s founding and principles, see Paul Chaat Smith and
Robert Allen Warrior, Like a Hurricane: !e Indian Movement from Alcatraz to
Wounded Knee (New York: $e New Press, 1996). For interviews with important
AIM members, see Antoinette Nora Claypol, ed., Ghost Rider Roads: Inside the
American Indian Movement, 1971-present (Taos, NM: Wild Embers Press, 2011).
5 Cousins Dino and Gary Butler were associated with AIM and Dino Butler participated
in events at the Lakota Pine Ridge Reservation in 1975. In 1981, while in
Vancouver working with others supporting Leonard Peltier, the brothers were sentenced
to four years imprisonment for “discharging a "rearm and dangerous driving”
a%er they challenged two armed Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP)
o'cers who were tailing their car (both charges were dubious at best). As Gord
notes, during the ensuing four years (1981-84) in Canadian prisons, the cousins
carried out a series of hunger strikes and protests in concert with other Indigenous
prisoners that successfully established the right to hold “pipe ceremonies, sweat
lodges, and other traditional sacred rituals behind bars.” $ey were released from
prison and extradited to the United States in 1984, where they were then tried for
the 1981 murder of a grave robber who had been violating Indigenous burial sites.
114
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
$e brothers were acquitted when it became obvious during the trial that they
were being framed by the FBI. See “Butlers Acquitted!” Open Road no. 18 (Spring
1986): 5; 9.
6 $e RCMP were founded in 1873 (originally as the Northwest Mounted Police)
to combat Indigenous resistance as the Canadian state expanded its control across
the prairies and northern territories. It evolved into a Canada-wide Federal Police
service and is the sole policing organization in much of the country. Since its
founding the organization has been the blunt instrument of government repression,
enforcing cultural genocide, land the%, child abduction by the state (the
forced removal of Indigenous children from their communities, channeling them
into “residential schools” or adoption programs), and other criminal acts against
Indigenous peoples.
7 $e Direct Action group (Garry Hannah, Ann Hansen, Doug Stewart, Juliet
Belmas, and Brent Taylor) coalesced in 1981 and carried out two bombings and
other actions before their arrest in 1983. $e group were involved with supporting
Indigenous resistance struggles and looked to traditional Indigenous relationships
with the land as an ecologically-sustainable alternative to rapacious industrialbased
exploitation under capitalist or communist-run states. See Ann Hansen,
Direct Action: Memoirs of an Urban Guerrilla (Toronto: Between the Lines, 2002),
40-41; 98-108.
8 In Spain, anarchists organized under the umbrella of the CNT (Confederación
Nacional del Trabajo/National Confederation of Labour), an anarchist-syndicalist
union founded in 1910 whose membership numbered in the hundreds of thousands
by 1936, when the fascist general Francisco Franco mobilized the Spanish
military in an attempted overthrow of the newly established (1931) Spanish Republican
government. Spanish anarchists took up arms and halted Franco’s assault.
$ey forged an alliance with the Republican government and joined in the "ght
against the fascists, but their e!orts were constantly undermined by the Spanish
Communist Party, aided by operatives from the Soviet Union. During the struggle
with Franco, Spanish anarchists initiated a social and economic revolution behind
Republican lines. $e revolution was modelled on the CNT’s program for social
transformation involving women’s liberation, workers’ ownership of industries,
the formation of rural communes, and a decentralized federated structure of
self-governance and administration. See José Peirats Valls, !e CNT in the Spanish
Revolution: Vols. 1-3, Chris Ealham, ed. (Hastings, East Sussex, UK: Christie
Books, 2005).
9 “What We Aim to Do,” Reality Now no. 6 (1986): 2.
10 “Never Give Up,” Reality Now no. 6 (1986): 2.
11 “Native News,” Reality Now no. 6 (1986): 6-7.
12 “$e Case against Leonard Peltier,” Reality Now no. 6 (1986): 16.
13 “$e Deafening of Labrador,” Reality Now no. 6 (1986): 20-21.
14 “$e Screaming in Our Hearts,” Reality Now no. 6 (1986): 17.
15 Big Mountain (Black Mesa) lies in territories shared by Navajo (Dinéh) and
Hopi peoples in the Southwestern United States. $e United States government
attempted to pit the Navajo and Hopi against each other by imposing a partition
115
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
of the land and forcing the Navajo population to relocate, thus clearing the way for
coal mining development.
16 “$e Screaming in Our Hearts,” 17.
17 “$e Screaming in Our Hearts,” 17.
18 ‘David,’ “$e Eagle Takes Flight,” Reality Now no. 6 (1986) -- Dissident News
(insert): 1-4;12-13. Reprinted in Antli!, Only a Beginning, 175-178.
19 ‘David,’ 12.
20 ‘David,’ 12.
21 ‘David,’ 13.
22 ‘David,’ 13.
23 Lubicon Lake Cree territory is located in northwest Alberta, Canada. $e
Lubicon’s territory remained unceded until 2018, when the Nation signed a treaty
agreement with the federal Canadian and provincial Albertan governments that
included monetary compensation and designated a 240 square kilometre parcel
of the Lubicon’s traditional territory as theirs. See “Lubicon Lake Band Reaches
Historic 121 million land claims settlement with Canada, Alberta,” !e Edmonton
Journal (2018): https://edmontonjournal.com/news/politics/lubicon-reacheshistoric-
121-million-land-claims-settlement-with-canada-alberta (Assessed
05/11/2020)
24 Daishowa Paper Manufacturing is a Japanese pulp and paper company founded
in 1938. A Canadian branch of Daishowa was established in 1969 and the company
ran a major pulp mill operation in Peace River, Alberta that exported the bulk
of its product to Japan for processing into paper.
25 $e Wet’suwet’en Nation’s unceded territories lie in northwest British Columbia.
$e Wet’suwet’en have been asserting sovereignty over their lands and waters
since British Columbia was incorporated into Canada in 1869. Most recently,
beginning in 2010, they constructed a series of camps and check points on their
territory obstructing the path of a planned pipeline (Coastal Gaslink) to transport
fracked gas from the interior of British Columbia to the coast, where it would be
shipped overseas (See Je! Corntassel’s article in this issue). Anarchists in Victoria
began participating in this resistance struggle in 2010 and Indigenous and non-
Indigenous people have mobilized across Canada to support the Wet’suwet’en. See
Unist’ot’en Camp: http://unistoten.camp/; Gidimt’en Yintah Access: https://www.
yintahaccess.com/historyandtimeline (Assessed 07/12/2020); and Wet’suwet’en
Solidarity Victoria: https://www.facebook.com/wetsuwetensolidarityvic/(Assessed
09/12/2020)
26 $e Six Nations reserve in southern Ontario, Canada is the territory of the
Kanien’kehá’ka (Mohawk), Cayuga, Onondaga, Onida, Seneca, and Tuscarora
peoples of the Haudenosaunee (Iroquois) Federation. In recent years, Six Nations
have been asserting sovereignty over lands designated to them by treaty with the
British colonial government in 1784 through direct action blockades, occupations,
and other measures. See “Haldimand Treaty,” Six Nations Land and Resources:
http://www.sixnations.ca/LandsResources/HaldProc.htm (Assessed 06/01/2021)
See “Interview with Kevin $omas, Friends of the Lubicon,” Corporate Crime
Reporter 10 no. 14 (8 April 1996): http://sisis.nativeweb.org/lubicon/kevint.html
116
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
(Assessed 05/11/2020)
28 Texada Island is located between the British Columbia mainland and central
Vancouver Island.
29 $e Dunsmuir hydro substation was a step toward plans to build a series of
regional hydro dams to supply power to pulp and paper mills as well as mining
operations in northern British Columbia. Litton Systems’ cruise missile guidance
system plant, located in Toronto, was integral to the production of nuclear armed
cruise missiles, which the United States government was preparing to deploy in
West Germany, Belgium, the Netherlands, Italy, and the United Kingdom to ramp
up its cold war confrontation with the Soviet Union in the early 1980s. See Hansen,
58-61 (Dunsmuir) and “Litton Bombing Communique” reprinted in Hansen,
477-486.
30 See the in-depth analysis of police actions targeting anarchists, including the
Bulldozer collective, in “Introduction,” Bulldozer no. 6 (1983): 2-5; 47.
31 Ann Hansen and Juliet Belmas, “Vancouver Five for Life,” Bulldozer no. 6 (1983):
8-11.
32 Kuwasi Balagon aka Donald Weems, “Anarchy Can’t Fight Alone,” Bulldozer no.
6 (1983): 30-31. Balagon received three consecutive life sentences in 1983 for his
actions during an armed robbery of a Brinks truck on October 20, 1981. He died
in a United States prison from AIDS-related complications in 1986. See Matt Meyer
and Karl Kersplebedeb, eds., Kuwasi Balagon -- A Soldier’s Story: Revolutionary
Writings by a New African Anarchist (Oakland, CA and Montreal: PM Press and
Kersplebedeb, 2019).
33 “Survival Network,” Bulldozer no. 6 (1983): 36.
34 Gary Butler, “Against the Corporate State,” Bulldozer no. 6 (1983): 12-13.
35 Up to 1984, the RCMP operated a special branch, the “RCMP Security Service,”
to conduct surveillance and disrupt organizations or movements deemed to be a
threat to the establishment. Robert Kaplan served as Solicitor General in charge of
overseeing RCMP operations for the Canadian government from 1980-84.
36 Butler, 12.
37 “Survival Network,” 36.
38 $e Dakota Access Pipeline (United States) was intended to transport oil from
North Dakota to southern Illinois for processing. Indigenous resistance to plans to
channel the pipeline under Lake Oahe and the Upper Missouri River, thus threatening
the only water supply of the Standing Rock Reservation (Lakota Nation),
erupted in Spring 2016. $ousands of Indigenous and non-Indigenous people
rallied to aid Lakota “Water Protectors” obstructing pipeline construction through
protests, blockades, and other forms of direct action. See Nike Estes, Our History
is Our Future: Standing Rock versus the Dakota Access Pipeline, and the Long
Tradition of Indigenous Resistance (London: Verso, 2019) and Gord Hill’s coverage
of Standing Rock posted at Warrior Publications: https://warriorpublications.
wordpress.com/?s=standing+rock (Assessed 05/11/2020)
39 From March 11 to September 26, 1990, the Kanien’kehá:kas of Kanesatake, a
Kanien’kehá:ka community adjacent to the town of Oka, just outside of Montreal,
Quebec, occupied and successfully defended their territory against the town’s
117
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
plans for a golf course expansion. Over the course of this defence, the situation
escalated from a blockade into an armed stando! and siege involving the Quebec
provincial police (Sûreté du Québec) and Canadian military. $e Kanien’kehá:kas
of Kanesatake were supported by their counterparts in the nearby Kanien’kehá:ka
community of Kahnawake, who blockaded major commuter routes to Montreal
that traversed through their territory (in response, racist mobs regularly converged
on the other side of the blockades: they shouted insults, threw stones and Molotov
cocktails, and attacked any Kanien’kehá:ka they could get their hands on). Additionally,
armed warriors from other Kanien’kehá:ka communities in Canada
and the United States joined the stando!. On July 20, in a show of unity, over
100 Indigenous leaders from across Canada convened at Kahnawake and threatened
total disruption (downing hydro power lines, blockading highways, shutting
down rail transport, etc.) if the Quebec police or Canadian military assaulted
the Kanien’kehá:kas. In addition, non-Indigenous activists, including anarchists,
mobilized in many towns and cities (Montreal, among them) to support the
Kanien’kehá:kas through demonstrations, blockades, and other actions. One of the
best publications produced immediately a%er the stando! (created by a photographer
and two reporters who were with the Kanien’kehá:kas during the siege) is
Craig Maclaine and Michael Baxendale, !is Land is Our Land: !e Kanien’kehá:ka
Revolt at Oka, photography by Robert Galbraith, (Montreal and Toronto: Optimum
Publishing International Inc., 1990).
40 $eir unceded territories lie in southern interior British Columbia.
41 “Sutikalh and Skweikwek’welt 2002 Submission to the International Olympic
Commission: O'cial Complaint, June 2002,” reprinted in No Olympics on Stolen
Land: Resources for Anti-2010 Resistance (Vancouver: Warrior Publications, 2007),
10. Italic is the authors’ emphasis.
42 “Sutikalh and Skweikwek’welt 2002 Submission,” 11.
43 Both derived from an older slogan, “No Justice on Stolen Land” which emblazoned
a special issue of Gord Hill’s journal, Oh-Toh-Kin (1992) analyzing the criminalization
of Indigenous peoples and Indigenous resistance in the prison system.
“No Justice on Stolen Land,” Oh-Toh-Kin 1:2 (1992), cover.
44 I am referencing Gord Hill’s de"nition of capitalism as “a socio-economic
system in which a wealthy elite control the means of production (land, resources,
industry), and who use the state to organize and maintain this system.# It arose
from colonialism and imperialism.# It di!ers from other economic systems in that
it is modern, high-tech, and nearly all-encompassing of the mass society it has
constructed.# It is also the dominant economic system in the world today.” Comrade
Black, “Drawing (A) Militant Resistance: Interview with Indigenous artist
and author Gord Hill,” Profane Existence, September 18, 2012: http://vancouver.
mediacoop.ca/story/drawing-militant-resistance-interview-indigenous-artist-andauthor-
gord-hill/12814 (Assessed 05/11/2020)
45 $e Heart Attack march took place on February 13, 2010. “Blocking the arteries
of capitalism” during the opening day of the Olympics, it certainly upended
business-as-usual in downtown Vancouver. See Scott Harris, “2010 Heart Attack:
Vancouver Olympics Opening Day” (February 14, 2010): http://vancouver.media118
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
coop.ca/olympics/report-2010-heart-attack/4994 (Assessed 05/11/2020)
46 “12th and Clark” was an anarchist social space in downtown Vancouver that
opened in September 2009 and closed some years later.
47 Submedia is a web-based anarchist video/podcast/radical news collective, based
in Canada. See https://sub.media/ (Assessed 05/11/2020)
48 Balaclava was a daily broadsheet published during the 2010 Anti-Olympic Convergence
in Vancouver (February 10-13, 2010) to protest and disrupt the launch of
the Olympic Games.
49 $e unceded territories of the Gitxsan Nation are adjacent to Wet’suwet’en territory
in northwest British Columbia. $e Gitxan and Wet’suwet’en peoples have a
long history of anti-colonial resistance, mutual aid, and cooperation.
50 $e Wet’suwet’en people speak Wit’suwit’en, which is a dialect of the Babine-
Wit’suwit’en language. Mélanie Morin of the Witsuwit’en Language and Culture
Society explains: “’anuc niwh’it’ën” refers to “laws and responsibilities related to the
territory, which by extension connects the people to both the natural and spiritual
worlds. It’s a complex relationship that is the foundation of Wet’suwet’en governance.”
#
51 See, for example, Peter Kropotkin, Mutual Aid (Montreal: Black Rose Books,
1988) and Elisée Reclus, Anarchy, Geography, Modernity: !e Radical Social
!ought of Elisée Reclus, John Clark and Camille Martin, eds., (Lanham, MA:
Lexington Books, 2004). Kropotkin (1942-1921) and Reclus (1830-1905) were
key theorists in the European wing of the anarchist movement, born in Russia and
France, respectively.
52 Emma Goldman, “Anarchism: What it Really Stands For” in Anarchism and
Other Essays (New York: Mother Earth Publishing, 1910), 64. Goldman is one
of the most well-known "gures in the American anarchist movement. I discuss
Indigenous ways of being and struggles for autonomy as they impacted American
anarchism during the era of World War One in Allan Antli!, “Decolonizing Modernism:
Robert Henri’s Portraits of the Tewa Pueblo Peoples of New Mexico,” !e
Art Bulletin 100:4 (2018): 106-132.
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Life Beyond the State: Regenerating Indigenous
International Relations and Everyday Challenges to
Settler Colonialism
Je! Corntassel*
On the morning of February 10, 2020, Howihkat (Freda Huson),
Unist’ot’en Camp spokesperson and Unist’ot’en Healing Centre
Director, and six other Indigenous women engaged in ceremony
on Wet’suwet’en yintah in the province of ‘British Columbia,’ (B.C.)
Canada.1 But this was no ordinary day at Unist’ot’en. One month
earlier, Wet’suwet’en hereditary chiefs had evicted Coastal GasLink
(CGL), which had set up an industrial camp with hundreds of workers
to build a pipeline across Wet’suwet’en yintah without the free,
prior and informed consent of the hereditary chiefs.2 "e eviction of
CGL from their yintah was the embodiment of Wet’suwet’en selfdetermination.
Ultimately, Wet’suwet’en hereditary chiefs
envisioned life beyond the violence of the state; their territory was a
place where Indigenous laws would be honored and upheld on Indigenous
lands and waters. However, CGL was not willing to comply
with the eviction. On February 6, 2020, a#er a month of negotiations,
the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP, the federal police
force of the Canadian government), accompanied by CGL workers,
raided Wet’suwet’en checkpoints and made twenty-one arrests over
four days in order clear the way for the CGL pipeline.3 "en they
made their way to the Unist’ot’en yintah.
Just a#er 8:30am on February 10, 2020, armed police and tactical of-
$cers arrived at the Unist’ot’en checkpoint in a convoy of over thirty
*Dr. Je! Corntassel is a writer, teacher and father from the Cherokee Nation. He
is currently Associate Professor in the Indigenous Studies Department at the University
of Victoria and Acting Director of the Centre for Indigenous Research and
Community-Led Engagement (CIRCLE). His research and teaching interests focus
on “Everyday Acts of Resurgence” and the intersections between Indigenous resurgence,
climate change, gender, and community well-being. He is currently completing
work for his forthcoming book on Sustainable Self-Determination, which
examines Indigenous climate justice, food security, and gender-based resurgence.
72
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
vehicles as a helicopter %ew overhead.4 Freda and others sang and
drummed next to a ceremonial $re. A %ag that stated “Reconciliation
is Dead” symbolically burned in the $re as the o&cers broke
down the checkpoint and approached. "e o&cers walked by several
red dresses hung along the road, which represented missing and
murdered Indigenous women. As Karla Tait, volunteer director of
clinical services at the Healing Centre, stated, “"e reason we have
dresses here is because we know that the violence against Indigenous
women and girls and communities increases with the presence of
industrial camps.”5 "e link between industrial camps (aka “man
camps”) and violence against Indigenous women and girls is well
documented in previous Indigenous communities.6 According to
Lower Brule Sioux Tribe scholar Nick Estes, “Like the land itself, the
bodies of Indigenous women, girls, trans and Two-Spirit people are
also seen as open for violence and violation. Resource extraction
intensi$es a murderous heteropatriarchy, meaning that grounding
resistance in Indigenous feminist interventions has become all the
more urgent.”7
Freda continued to sing as she and six others were arrested by the of-
$cers.8 CGL workers systematically began removing the red dresses
along the road as others put out the ceremonial $re. In removing
the red dresses, they were attempting to erase Wet’suwet’en peoples
- especially Indigenous women - from the landscape. In response,
supporters across Canada began to blockade railways (Tyendinaga
Mohawk) as well as the B.C. Provincial Legislature to demonstrate
their solidarity with Wet’suwet’en.
Against the backdrop of Wet’suwet’en self-determination and protection
of their lands and waters, this article examines ways that
Indigenous peoples act everyday to regenerate their resurgence at
one level by decentering the state and heteropatriarchy to focus on
complex relationships to land, community and culture. At another
level, the act of turning away from the settler state o#en generates
discomfort among the public and exposes contradictions embedded
in state policy/laws, which may prompt others to take action in
solidarity with Indigenous peoples. "is was certainly the case with
Wet’suwet’en actions recently.
73
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Amidst the ever-changing terrain of contemporary shape-shi#ing
colonization, this article discusses how Indigenous peoples engage
in turning away from the state and the ways these movements take
place in unexpected and everyday ways. I will examine three examples
of ways that Indigenous international relations are being practiced
so as to bypass states and create new forms of solidarity across
colonial borders: "e Indigenous Women of the Americas Defenders
of Mother Earth Treaty Compact (2015) that spans from Turtle
Island to South America; the Haida and Heiltsuk Treaty of Peace,
Respect and Responsibility (2015) initiated to protect their relationship
with herring; and the Tyendinaga Mohawk blockade of the VIA
rail in solidarity with Wet’suwet’en (2020). In the following section,
I will consider ways that resurgence and settler colonialism have
been theorized and how the act of turning away from the state isn’t
just a literal positioning – it’s just as much about decentering of state
authority in everyday life as well as remembering and re-imagining
life beyond the state based on honoring relational responsibilities.
Ultimately, “Indigenous resurgence means having the courage and
imagination to envision life beyond the state.”9
Settler Colonialism and Turning Away from the State
An Indigenous resurgence paradigm reframes decolonization by
turning away from the state in order to focus more fully on the complex
interrelationships between Indigenous nationhood, place-based
relationships, and community-centred practices that reinvigorate
everyday acts of renewal and regeneration.10 Resurgence is inspired
by the earlier writings of Frantz Fanon, Standing Rock Sioux scholar
Vine Deloria, Jr., Secwepemc Chief George Manuel, Sto:lo writer
Lee Maracle, Cheyenne scholar Henrietta Mann and several others;
more importantly, however, it is animated and motivated by
community-driven practices such as $sh-ins, language revitalization,
land reclamation, and the renewal of human and more-than-human
relationships. According to Anishinaabe scholar and activist Leanne
Betasamosake Simpson:
...resurgence must be concerned with the reattachment
of our minds, bodies and spirits to the network of rela74
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
tionships and ethical practices and generates grounded
normativity. It means the reattachment of our bodies to
our lands, regardless of whether those lands are rural,
reserves, or urban.11
"ere are several strands of community resurgence and no one
template exists for this movement – resurgence is continuously being
remembered, reinvented, and regenerated by contemporary Indigenous
youth and leaders. "e reattachment process that Simpson
describes above is about re-orienting our collective and individual
focus toward nurturing and perpetuating land and water-based relationships
that promote community health and well-being. According
to Mushkegowuk (Cree) scholar Michelle Daigle:
...resurgence centers the multiple sovereignties that are
lived across diverse Indigenous landscapes, from one
nation to another, from one clan to another, from one
community to another, but also the multiple sources of
authority within each of these nations, clans and communities,
which have been systematically excluded from
settler colonial and neoliberal spaces.12
"is diversity of nationhood and governance fosters a multiplicity of
mobilization, innovation and regeneration strategies across di!erent
Indigenous landscapes and seascapes.
Resurgence has several dimensions to it which will be explored
throughout this article but four interrelated elements stand out in
the literature and from previous community mobilizations: 1. Centering
Indigenous nationhood and land/water-based governance; 2.
Honoring and practicing relational responsibilities, which form the
basis for Indigenous self-determining authority; 3. Turning away
from the state and decentering the politics of recognition, heteropatriarchy,
and settler colonialism; 4. Engaging in everyday acts of
renewal, remembering, and regeneration.
Of the above-referenced elements, one of the most misunderstood
aspects of resurgence is the notion of turning away from the state.
75
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
For example, Anishinaabe scholar Sheryl Lightfoot mistakenly
con%ates critical engagement with settler colonialism and a centering
of Indigenous nationhood with “pessimism” when describing
resurgence, concluding that “"e pessimism traps together work
to foreclose any possibility that there could be credible openings of
opportunity to negotiate a fairer and just relationship of co-existence
with even the most progressive state government.”13 Additionally,
Political Scientist Michael Murphy somehow treats resurgence as
being detached from relationality, and erroneously contends that
resurgence theorists advocate “…a wholesale retreat from state institutions…”
which “…runs the risk of increasing the vulnerability of
Indigenous communities.”14
However, when discussing resurgence in theory and in practice,
and the notion of turning away from the state, it becomes clear that
resurgence does not constitute a “wholesale retreat from state institutions.”
According to Yellowknives Dene scholar Glen Coulthard:
Does it require that we vacate the $eld of state negotiations
and participation entirely? Of course not. Settlercolonialism
has rendered us a radical minority in our
own homelands, and this necessitates that we continue
to engage with the state’s legal and political system. What
our present condition does demand, however, is that we
begin to approach our engagements with the settler-state
legal apparatus with a degree of critical self-re%ection,
skepticism, and caution that has to date been largely
absent in our e!orts.15
As Coulthard discusses above, turning away from the state does not
mean complete disengagement. It does, however, entail a decentering
of the state and other colonial entities by consciously recentering Indigenous
nationhood and land-based governance. It also recognizes
the limitations of certain strategic engagements with the state, such
as a rights-based discourse.
Another mistaken conclusion that stems from the above-mentioned
misunderstandings of a “wholesale retreat from state institutions”
76
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
relates to Indigenous agency. According to Lightfoot, “By overlooking
and/or discounting Indigenous agency and not even considering
the possibility that Indigenous peoples could themselves be calculating,
strategic political actors in their own right, and vis-à-vis states,
the pessimistic lens of the resurgence school unnecessarily, unproductively
and unjustly limits the $eld of possibility for Indigenous
peoples’ decision-making, thus actually countering and inhibiting
expressions of Indigenous self-determination.”16
When discussing how an exclusive focus on the rights discourse
can distract Indigenous peoples from their inherent responsibilities
to land, community and culture, resurgence theorists do not foster
a wholesale rejection of these strategies as Indigenous peoples use
all available means of mobilization to pursue and enact their selfdetermining
authority. Considering possible limitations of these
various strategies is much di!erent than denying Indigenous agency.
For example, I contend that “When addressing contemporary shapeshi
#ing colonialism, the rights discourse can only take struggles for
Indigenous decolonization and resurgence so far.”17 "ere is systematic
exclusion and violence taking place despite the appearance of a
‘most progressive state government’.
A resurgence-oriented critique of a rights-based discourse suggests
that a careful, nuanced approach to human rights is warranted and,
when engaging in rights-based forums, one should understand the
limitations of the rights-based approach for achieving particular
community objectives relating to mobilization to strengthen selfdetermining
authority. In an attempt to identify perceived ‘credible
openings’ relating to Indigenous struggles for self-determination,
the prescriptive approaches of Murphy, Lightfoot, and others run the
risk of minimizing a multiplicity of Indigenous forms of agency and
worldviews relating to resurgence and nationhood. Given the diversity
of approximately 5,000-8,000 Indigenous nations’ experiences,
perspectives, beliefs, and practices, it is problematic and a bit presumptuous
to characterize Indigenous actions that decenter the state
as pessimistic or as somehow misguided.
For example, the United Nations’ Declaration on the Rights of Indig77
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
enous Peoples (UNDRIP), in so-called British Columbia (Canada),
highlight the diverse strategies that Indigenous peoples employ when
asserting their self-determining authority. UNDRIP, which was adopted
by the UN General Assembly in 2007, is the most comprehensive
Indigenous rights instrument in e!ect today. Although Canada
initially voted against the Declaration (along with Australia, New
Zealand and the United States), it reversed its position (once there
was a change in administration) and removed its permanent objector
status in 2016, promising future implementation of UNDRIP.18 On
November 26, 2019, province of B.C. legislators unanimously passed
the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
Act (UNDRIPA).19 While this is an important moment toward the
implementation of Indigenous rights in B.C. and in Canada, the
provincial Minister of Indigenous Relations and Reconciliation
emphasized that UNDRIPA would not give “legal force and e!ect” to
UNDRIP and would not immediately change Indigenous-related law
in B.C..20 Aside from UNDRIP, the United Nations’ Convention on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD), of which Canada
is a signatory, issued the following statement in December 2019:
...calls upon the State party to immediately halt the
construction and suspend all permits and approvals for
the construction of the Coastal Gas Link pipeline in
the traditional and unceded lands and territories of the
Wet’suwet’en people, until they grant their free, prior
and informed consent, following the full and adequate
discharge of the duty to consult;21
Neither the passage of UNDRIPA nor the CERD appeals to Canada
had any noticeable impact in supporting the Wet’suwet’en hereditary
chiefs’ eviction notice to CGL on January 5, 2020, despite the international
and local documentation that CGL was on Wet’suwet’en
territory without their free, prior and informed consent. With the
ink barely dry on the recently-passed UNDRIPA, B.C. Premier John
Horgan announced the CGL project would proceed regardless of the
eviction, informing the media that “the rule of law applies.”22 While
Wet’suwet’en hereditary chiefs continue to seek a conversation with
B.C. and federal o&cials over the implementation of UNDRIP on
78
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
their territory, they have witnessed the limitations of a rights discourse
in protecting their relationships to the land and CGL’s disregard
for free, prior and informed consent. In the words of Freda
Huson and others acting in solidarity with the Wet’suwet’en: “Reconciliation
is dead.”
Turning away from the state in the above example involves exposing
the illegitimate and unjust foundations of the state’s authority. In
evoking the “rule of law,” Horgan demonstrated the contradictions
embedded in his understanding of UNDRIPA as well as ongoing
violations of Wet’suwet’en law. By decentering state authority and
centering Wet’suwet’en law, one can begin to see where energies can
best be directed to promote meaningful justice, accountability, and
resurgence. "e Wet’suwet’en evicted CGL, in part, to protect their
homelands from further encroachment by industrial camp workers
and to prevent violence to their community. As Coulthard points
out, “It is only by privileging and grounding ourselves in these normative
lifeways and resurgent practices that we have a hope of surviving
our strategic engagements with the colonial state with integrity
and as Indigenous peoples.”23 Resurgence is about regenerating
our lifeways, relational responsibilities, and sustainable pathways so
that we approach engagements with states and other colonial actors
from a strength-based perspective.
Diverse community strategies for Indigenous language revitalization,
which is a critical aspect of community resurgence, demonstrate
that multi-faceted approaches are employed to achieve resurgence
through state and other institutional engagements. With the goal of
promoting language speakers, there are multiple ways for teaching
the language to learners. For example, public schools may o!er language
programs that are helpful in facilitating speaking and writing
skills. Additionally, Indigenous nations may o!er in-person or online
courses to help those learning the language. Museums, non-governmental
organizations, and other state funded agencies may serve as
resources for language acquisition and development. Government
grants may be available to assist in teaching Indigenous languages
at the community level. International rights-based documents, such
as UNDRIP, may provide the legal basis to advocate for Indigenous
79
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
language resources. Online forums, applications, and groups can also
be utilized for language speakers. And there are other communitydriven
approaches to language resurgence that may not require
funding and are done more informally in everyday settings, such as
ceremonies and feasts.
All of the above exemplify di!erent forms of engaging with the state
and other entities while maintaining a focus on language revitalization.
In this same respect, just as language is centered in the above
discussion, resurgence prioritizes the strengthening of Indigenous
nationhood, which can be enhanced through multiple pathways
involving state engagement but are ultimately community-driven
processes. According to Estes, “Indigenous nationhood is o#en
misunderstood as an exclusive project – the sole aspiration of just
Indigenous peoples – or as con$ned within narrow de$nitions of the
nation-state.”24 In other words, Indigenous nationhood doesn’t %ourish
in isolation – it’s grounded in multiple relationships that help
generate community health and well-being. As Simpson aptly states,
“Resurgence cannot occur in isolation. A collective conversation and
mobilization is critical to avoid reproducing the individualism and
colonial isolation that settler colonialism fosters.”25 Spaces of Indigenous
resurgence can open up anywhere that community exists and
can %ourish within multiple contexts.
As the complexities of the above discussion on language revitalization
demonstrate, while turning away from the state is a strategic
orientation and positioning, it is not an abandonment of relations
with state actors; instead it is a rea&rmation of Indigenous “radiating
relationships with plant nations, animal nations, insects, bodies
of water, air, soil, and spiritual beings with whom we share parts of
our territory.”26 Turning away is also a way to act in contention with
aspects of state coercion that may attempt to align Indigenous nation
priorities with longer-term state goals via the politics of recognition.
According to Coulthard, there is a great danger when gearing Indigenous
peoples’ goals toward a “recognition-based approach to reconciling
Indigenous peoples’ assertions of nationhood with settler-state
sovereignty via the accommodation of Indigenous identity-related
claims through the negotiation of settlements over issues such as
80
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
land, economic development, and self-government.”27
"e politics of recognition is undergirded by settler colonialism,
which is premised on settler populations attempting to dominate
Indigenous landscapes and seascapes in order to maintain a permanent
presence on the land at the expense of Indigenous nations and
peoples. Settler colonialism as “a structure, not an event”28 is a collective
of shape-shi#ing entities that employ state coercion to govern
through overlapping structures of domination “intrinsically shaped
by and shaping interactive relations of coloniality, racism, gender,
class, sexuality and desire, capitalism, and ableism.”29 Consequently,
acting in contention with settler colonialism entails “the disruption
of intersecting forces of power such as colonialism, heteropatriarchy
and capitalism.”30 Despite shape-shi#ing colonial e!orts to erase
Indigenous peoples from settler-dominated landscapes, Kanaka
Maoli scholar J. Kehaulani Kauanui describes the inherent dynamics
of “enduring Indigeneity” in which Indigenous nations and peoples
“exist, resist, and persist.”31 According to Kauanui, “Understanding
settler colonialism as a structure exposes the fact that colonialism
cannot be relegated to the past, even though the past-present should
be historicized.”32 Shape-shi#ing colonial entities are more than just
states – they are institutions, such as non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and multinational corporations (MNCs) and other
forms of power that are exerted against Indigenous peoples and their
complex relationships. From this deep and ongoing history with
settler colonialism, Indigenous peoples are “enduring” because they
do not center colonial institutions in their everyday lives while also
identifying new ways to expose and challenge these ever-changing
coercive power dynamics.
So what does it actually mean to turn away from the state amidst a
backdrop of ongoing colonization? First, it means truly coming to
terms with the fact that Indigenous bodies -- men, women, girls,
trans, two-spirit, and queer people -- are viewed by colonial powers
as, according to Mohawk scholar Audra Simpson, “a direct threat to
their sovereignty and governmentality.”33 "e violence that occurs on
Indigenous lands also takes place on Indigenous bodies in distinct
ways. Second, turning away from the state by centering Indigenous
81
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
nationhood does not entail an unwillingness to engage with the
settler state; quite the opposite. As political theorist Michael Elliott
points out:
...spaces of resurgence are structured not on but for the
principle of reciprocity. "ey presuppose Indigenous
centricity and authority, and in doing so $gure settlers as
guests: if they are to remain welcome, settlers are under
requirement to adapt their behaviour to meet with conditions
of hospitality that they have no say in determining.
34
"e process of turning away from the state actually invites settler engagement
regarding solidarity movements and addressing injustices.
Amidst discomfort and unease with the current colonial system,
settlers’ responses can set the tone for protecting and expanding
sites of Indigenous resurgence. "is is certainly the case with the
Wet’suwet’en in 2020 as settlers were asked to help blockade railways
and convey demands to politicians and policymakers regarding
the eviction of the RCMP and CGL from Wet’suwet’en homelands.
"ird, amidst resurgence movements, there is o#en an attempt to
engage with the state on multiple levels to generate accountability,
solidarity, and, where appropriate, to seek recourse from global forums.
"is can take the form of invoking UNDRIP, the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights, the Convention on Biodiversity,
the Convention on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, as well
as the UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. With the realization
that these forums have limits in terms of achieving resurgence
aims, Indigenous nations make careful decisions about where to
direct their time and energy. Fourth, in turning away from the state,
Indigenous nations may initiate collaboration and occasionally
treaty-making between themselves to conduct their own forms of diplomacy
with other Indigenous nations.35 "ese international actions
can sometimes render the state redundant in terms of the mutual
recognition of Indigenous nations and the exercise of self-determining
authority, both of which pose a credible threat to the legitimacy
of state governments.
82
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Finally, turning away from the state takes place in everyday ways
that are o#en unacknowledged and unfold in familial ways at the
kitchen table, within ceremony, and other spaces that are o#en hidden
from public view.36 Examining everyday ways that Indigenous
peoples turn away from the state allows us to better challenge gender
binaries and colonial notions of nuclear families; to witness intimate
settings and how these inform relational responsibilities; and to see
how micro-processes can potentially lead to larger scale actions.37
Estes describes the everyday ways that Indigenous peoples “conspire
for freedom”: “Hidden from view to outsiders, this constant tunneling,
plotting, planning, harvesting, remembering, and conspiring for
freedom – the collective faith that another world is possible – is the
most important aspect of revolutionary work. It is from everyday life
that the collective con$dence to change reality grows, giving rise to
extraordinary events.”38 With these aspects of resurgence in mind, I
will now examine three “extraordinary events” that shed further light
on the dynamics of turning away from the state.
Indigenous international relations in action
Indigenous peoples engage in forms of diplomacy in distinct ways
that illustrate a turning away from the state. When Indigenous peoples
decenter the state, they are also rede$ning what international
entails, which challenges the false, Westphalian distinctions of what
constitutes domestic versus international political action. Indigenous
international relations persist despite state attempts to con$ne
Indigenous nations to an “internal” or domestic status within state
borders.
Over the past ten years, there has been an increase in treatymaking
between Indigenous nations, including the Iinnii or Bu!alo Treaty
(2014), which started with ten Indigenous nations as signatories and
now has twenty-nine signatories who are committed to protecting
Bu!alo on Indigenous lands across Turtle Island.39 In 2016, a Treaty
Alliance Against Tar Sands Expansion was signed on Musqueam
territory in Vancouver by $#y Indigenous nations traversing both
Canada and the U.S. border.40 "ese practices of Indigenous international
relations turn away from the state in four distinct ways: 1)
83
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Honor interdependency with the natural world; 2) Engage in continuous
renewal of sacred commitments via ceremony and regular
gatherings; 3) Treaty responsibilities and/or acts of solidarity are
generated from relationships; 4) Focus is on appropriate ways to
act as self-determining nations (versus who has legitimate authority).
In this section I will look at three examples in which Indigenous
international relations are being practiced through acts of diplomacy
as well as treaties with other Indigenous nations in ways that turn
away from the state and create new forms of solidarity across borders:
"e Indigenous Women of the Americas Defenders of Mother
Earth Treaty Compact (2015) that spans from Turtle Island to South
America; the Haida and Heiltsuk Treaty of Peace, Respect and Responsibility
(2015) to protect herring from commercial $sheries; and
the Tyendinaga Mohawk 2020 blockade of the railways in eastern
Canada in solidarity with Wet’suwet’en. "ese are treaties that have
purposely decentered states and have focused on relationships between
and for Indigenous nations.
On September 27, 2015, a historic gathering took place on Lenape
territory (aka New York City) that was also the $rst time in recent
history that Indigenous women from the Americas engaged in
treaty-making together.41 "e woman who created the treaty, Casey
Camp-Horinek from the Ponca Nation, is a leading advocate of
promoting the rights of nature, and in 2017 she helped the Ponca
Nation put into law a rights of nature statute, which promised to
prosecute anyone in Ponca court who dishonored natural rights on
their homelands.42 A rights of nature statute provides legal rights
of personhood to ecosystems, land and other aspects of the natural
world so that they can regenerate and be better protected within
legal systems. In 2015, Camp-Horinek introduced "e Indigenous
Women of the Americas Defenders of Mother Earth Treaty Compact
with these words:
...we give thanks for the guidance and the support that
made this day the sacred day that it has become at this
historic Treaty between the Indigenous Women of the
North and South. We invite and implore the prayers
and the spreading of the word to rise up and join this
84
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
movement that has begun in the times before us and
moves into this wave of awareness across the face of our
Mother.43
"e Indigenous Women’s Treaty has several provisions that make
it unique. First, it outlines the crimes currently being committed
against Mother Earth. Second, it makes connections between the
crimes against Mother Earth and crimes against women, describing
how women are inseparable from Mother Earth. "ird, it calls for
each signatory to take action each month as well as every solstice
and equinox to counter the crimes against the earth:
We call upon our sisters and their allies around the world
to gather together on each new moon to pray for the sacred
system of life, guidance and wisdom, and, on every solstice
and equinox to:
– Become educated concerning the harms to life and
the environment
– Pledge to support the rights of Indigenous Peoples
– Inform yourself and join the circles of global resistance
demanding a new system that seeks harmony
between humans and the rights of Mother Earth
– Pledge to nonviolence and become trained in nonviolent
direct action
– Nonviolently rise up with others in your communities
and around the world to demand immediate
changes in the laws that have created the destruction
– Commit nonviolent acts of civil disobedience
where destruction is occurring until it is stopped
– Continue these acts until “business as usual” is
halted and life on Mother Earth is safe for generations
to come. 44
In addition to the original women signatories, Indigenous women
who are committed to this project can sign on online. "e abovereferenced
Indigenous women’s treaty is innovative in several ways,
notably, its activism follows a cycle of nature (every new moon each
month and every equinox and solstice). Additionally, the respon85
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
sibilities outlined in the treaty are to be acted on and solidarity is
expressed across North and South American contexts. Finally, no
states are signatories to this document – it is exclusively for and by
Indigenous women. States are intentionally decentered here (but
without complete disengagement) in order to focus on relational accountabilities
between and for Indigenous nations and communities.
Based on their long-standing relationship, the Haida and Heiltsuk
Nations had an oral Peace Treaty that was agreed to in the 1850’s at a
potlatch in Heiltsuk territory and was in response to encroachment
by Europeans onto their lands and waterways. "ese two nations had
a long history of trade and warfare together, with their last major
con%ict taking place in 1852.45 "e Haida and Heiltsuk came together
again in 2014 over a herring $sheries dispute with the Canadian
Department of Fisheries O&ce (DFO). For both of these nations,
their governance and lives revolved around their relationship to herring.
In order to protect and restore diminishing herring stocks, each
nation fought to keep commercial $sheries from harvesting herring.
Tensions rose as frustrations with the DFO’s management of herring
increased in 2014. At one herring protest, Heiltsuk leader Frank
Brown stated, “the arrogance and disrespect that we are shown in
our own homeland has to end. It is only going to end when we take
our rightful place as the original stewards of this land.”46
In 2015, Heiltsuk First Nation closed the sac roe $shery to commercial
$shers in order to protect the herring stock. According to
Chief Councillor Marilyn Slett, “It is our duty to protect our herring
resource, which allows us to exercise our rights according to the
Doctrine of Priority. We will not allow continued DFO mismanagement
to threaten our way of life.”47
In 2014-15 amidst the herring $sheries disputes, Haida and Heiltsuk
decided to reinvigorate their alliance from the 1850’s to “strengthen
our political authority to protect our lands and seas.” In 2015 at a
potlatch in Bella Bella, the Treaty of Peace, Respect and Responsibility
was renewed and formalized to “seek great degrees of self-determination
and independence.48 "is process helped strengthen solidarity
among women as well. In 2015, over one hundred Haida and
86
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Heiltsuk women held a two-day gathering on “cultural well-being,
traditional knowledge, language revitalization and ongoing community-
based projects.” "ese gatherings have continued and re%ect an
embodied commitment by Haida and Heiltsuk women to live the
terms of the Treaty of Peace, Respect and Responsibility.49
Both Haida and Heiltsuk demonstrate the way that they turned
away from the state in order to renew their treaty of friendship. "is
was done at a potlatch ceremony, initially in the 1850’s and again in
2014-15, which highlights the importance of ceremony, protocol,
and relational responsibilities undergirding these sacred compacts.
Importantly, Haida and Heiltsuk women have played a key role in
the implementation of the treaty of friendship, which a&rms the
leadership of Indigenous women in confronting injustice and ongoing
colonization.
In the $nal example of turning away from the state, on February
6, 2020, the Tyendinaga Mohawk nation, whose territories lie in
eastern Ontario, set up two camps along the Canadian National
Railway (CN) rail lines to shut down all passenger and freight trains
from operating. Both CN and VIA (CN’s passenger service) stopped
operating and continued to be closed through most of February,
impacting over 24,000 passengers. Mohawks of Tyendinaga were acting
in solidarity with the hereditary chiefs of Wet’suwet’en and stated
clearly that they would only dismantle the camps voluntarily once
the RCMP le# Wet’suwet’en territory (the RCMP moved in to forcibly
clear the camps on February 28).
While these actions took place, Tyendinaga Elder Katsitsiase Maracle
was visiting the camps near the railway lines to “make sure
they are holding on to the peace.”50 According to Maracle, “I think
what is happening right now is putting it out there in a way of saying,
‘Wake up people. Look, open your eyes to what is happening
in the world.’”51 Evoking memories of the 1990 “Kanesatake Resistance”
(also known as the “Oka Crisis”, see Antli! and Hill, note
39), Canada’s Indigenous Services Minister Marc Miller met with
the Tyendinaga Mohawks and said the federal government hoped to
demonstrate some of the lessons learned from Oka: “Do we repeat
87
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
the errors of the past? "irty years ago, police went in guns blazing
in Oka and someone died. So that shouldn’t be lost on anyone that’s
telling us to go in there and impose law and order.”52
"e Wet’suwet’en hereditary chiefs traveled to visit with Tyendinaga
Mohawks on February 21, 2020 to express their support. Additionally,
they met with Kahnawake Mohawks – whose territories are
adjacent to Montreal, Quebec -- on February 22, 2020, and engaged
in ceremony with both traditional leaders and band council members.
According to community accounts, traditional chiefs engaged
in a ‘Words at the Edge of the Woods” welcoming ceremony, which
was a demonstration of peaceful relations that took place at the
Kahnawake longhouse.53 According to hereditary chief Woos, “What
we did today was renew our friendship, we shared our culture and
our traditions, we exchanged information about who we are as the
people of this land and we will continue that relationship.”54
While the Tyendinaga example did not involve a treaty, it was clearly
motivated by relationship and solidarity with the Wet’suwet’en. Additionally,
ceremony played a big role in not only supporting the
blockade of the railways, but also in welcoming Wet’suwet’en hereditary
chiefs to the territory. Finally, a long history of resistance,
including the 1990 Oka Crisis, has communicated to policymakers
that lessons of the past should be accounted for in order to achieve
di!erent outcomes. "ese examples of ‘turning away from the state’
each entail unique ways of centering Indigenous nationhood and everyday
acts of resurgence through ceremony and protection of lands/
waters while also engaging with settler populations to promote wider
solidarity actions.
Conclusion
As Estes points out, “What continues to sustain Indigenous peoples
through the horrors of settler colonialism are the recent memories
of freedom, the visions enacting it, and the daring conspiracies to recapture
it.”55 I started o! this article with an account of RCMP arrests
on Wet’suwet’en Nation territories and how hereditary chiefs acted to
turn away from the state as they attempted to evict both the RCMP
88
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
and CGL from their yintah. "e arrest of Freda and six other women
during ceremony highlights the “horrors of settler colonialism” and
the ways that resurgence takes place amidst ongoing violence and
attempted erasures of Indigenous peoples from their landscapes and
seascapes. As Freda and others have demonstrated, violence against
the land and violence against Indigenous bodies are interrelated.
Additionally, this violence is gendered as evidenced by the linkages
between “man camps” and sexual assaults against Indigenous women,
girls, two-spirit and queer peoples.
"roughout this article, I have demonstrated that a turning away
from the state, which includes heteropatriarchy and settler colonialism,
entails a centering of Indigenous nationhood and land-based
governance, but it is not a wholesale disengagement with state actors.
Instead, those nations and communities activating resurgence invite
engagement and solidarity through their actions and articulations
of their relational responsibilities. By making settler populations
uncomfortable/feel inconvenienced, Tyendinaga Mohawks, for
example, are sending a powerful message about acts of solidarity and
relationships. As Elliott and others point out, spaces of resurgence
embody reciprocity by centering Indigenous nationhood and inviting
settlers to engage in solidarity actions on Indigenous terms. Ultimately,
focusing on everyday actions allows us to better understand
the dynamics of family resurgence that takes us out of the classroom
to kitchen, backyard, and other land or water-based activities where
our families can thrive together – these micro-actions may ultimately
lead to larger scale forms of revolutionary change.
By examining "e Indigenous Women of the Americas Defenders of
Mother Earth Treaty Compact (2015), the Haida and Heiltsuk Treaty
of Peace, Respect and Responsibility (2015) and the Tyendinaga Mohawk
blockade of the railways in solidarity with Wet’suwet’en (2020),
we gain a deeper understanding of the e!ective ways that practitioners
of resurgence turn away from the state and also strategically
engage with state actors. Understanding the role of ceremony and
relational responsibilities in activism also helps bring clarity to international
Indigenous relations on the ground. "is work provides
important insights regarding how turns away from the state take
89
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
place within di!erent community contexts and how these inform
a resurgence paradigm. By centering Indigenous nationhood and
practicing land-based governance, Indigenous peoples are honouring
and nurturing community resurgence so that future generations
will thrive.
Notes
1 Yintah or Yintikh in this context means earth or speci$cally territory in
Witsuwit’en, which is the language of the Wet’suwet’en people. For more
on this see the First Voices website: https://www.$rstvoices.com/explore/
FV/sections/Data/Athabascan/Wet%E2%80%99suwet%E2%80%99en/
Wet%E2%80%99suwet%E2%80%99en/learn/words/categories/3b3c8f91-d610-
4450-9573-8b72c32699a7/10/1
2 "e Unist’ot’en Camp, which includes the Unist’ot’en Healing Centre, originated
in 2009 when seven oil and gas pipelines were proposed that would
have encroached on Wet’suwet’en homelands and waterways. Beginning in
2010, the Camp and Healing Centre were constructed over years by members
of the Unist’ot’en house, Gilseyhu clan (one of $ve Wet’suwet’en clans), other
Wet’suwet’en, and Indigenous and non-Indigenous activists on a location whose
access was crucial for pipeline construction. It was conceived as a place for
Wet’suwet’en peoples, with the support of hereditary chiefs and others acting in
solidarity, to honor Wet’suwet’en relational responsibilities and protect the land
from extractive industries. One of these industries, Coastal GasLink (CGL), a
subsidiary of TC Energy, formerly TransCanada, planned to build a pipeline to
deliver lique$ed natural gas across unceded Wet’suwet’en homelands without the
free, prior and informed consent of Wet’suwet’en hereditary chiefs. On 7 January
2019, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police invaded a checkpoint blocking access
to the Unist’ot’en Camp and Healing Centre erected by members of the Gidumt’en
clan of the Wet’suwet’en and arrested fourteen land defenders. Despite not having
the consent of Unist’ot’en and Gidumt’en hereditary chiefs to enter Wet’suwet’en
homelands, the police asserted jurisdiction via an injunction issued in support of
CGL. It has since been disclosed that the police were prepared to use “lethal force”
against the land defenders at the Gidumt’en checkpoint on January 7. "e forceful
destruction of the Gidumt’en checkpoint and subsequent arrests set the tone for
“negotiations” with hereditary chiefs regarding access to the Unist’ot’en Camp and
Healing Centre so that CGL employees could build the pipeline.
3 Hosgood, Amanda Follett. “Emotions High as RCMP Arrest Seven at Last
Wet’suwet’en Post.” !e Tyee (February 10, 2020). Available at: https://thetyee.ca/
News/2020/02/10/Emotions-High-Unistoten-Arrests/
4 Hosgood, “Emotions High.”
5 Hosgood, “Emotions High.”
6 See for example, Out of Sight, Out of Mind: Gender, Indigenous Rights, and Energy
Development in Northeast British Columbia, Canada (Amnesty International,
2016); Indigenous Communities and Industrial Camps: Promoting Healthy Commu90
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
nities in Settings of Industrial Change (Firelight Group, February 2017).
7 Estes, Nick. Our History is the Future: Standing Rock versus the Dakota Access
Pipeline, and the Long Tradition of Indigenous Resistance (New York: Verso, 2019).
8 Among those arrested were Unist’ot’en leaders Freda Huson (Chief Howihkat),
Brenda Michell (Chief Geltiy), Dr. Karla Tait and four other Indigenous land
defenders.
9 Corntassel, Je!. “Re-Envisioning Resurgence: Indigenous Pathways to Decolonization
and Sustainable Self-Determination.” Decolonization: Indigeneity, Education
and Society 1(1) (2012): 89.
10 See for example: Alfred, Taiaiake. Wasáse: Indigenous Pathways of Action and
Freedom (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2005); Simpson, Leanne. Dancing
On Our Turtle’s Back: Stories of Nishnaabeg Re-Creation, Resurgence, and a New
Emergence (Winnipeg: Arbeiter Ring, 2011); Corntassel, Je!. “Re-Envisioning
Resurgence: Indigenous Pathways to Decolonization and Sustainable Self-Determination.”
Decolonization: Indigeneity, Education and Society 1(1) (2012): 86-101;
Goodyear-Ka’opua, Noelani. !e Seeds We Planted: Portraits of a Native Hawaiian
Charter School (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2013); Coulthard,
Glen. Red Skin, White Masks: Rejecting the Colonial Politics of Recognition (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 2014); Simpson, Leanne. As We Have Always
Done: Indigenous Freedom through Radical Resistance (Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 2017).
11 Simpson, As We Have Always Done, p. 44.
12 Michelle Daigle. “Tracing the terrain of Indigenous food sovereignties” (2017)
46:2, 297-315. !e Journal of Peasant Studies, 301.
13 Sheryl R. Lightfoot. “"e Pessimism Traps of Indigenous Resurgence.” In Tim
Stevens and Nicholas Michelsen, eds. Pessimism in International Relations (Cham:
Palgrave Macmillan, 2019). pp. 155-172.
14 Michael Murphy. “Indigenous Peoples and the Struggle for Self-Determination:
A Relational Strategy.” Canadian Journal of Human Rights 8(1) (2019): 67-102.
15 Coulthard, Glen. Red Skin, White Masks: Rejecting the Colonial Politics of Recognition
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2014), p. 179.
16 Lightfoot, “"e Pessimism Traps of Indigenous Resurgence,” p. 168.
17 Corntassel, Je!. “Re-envisioning resurgence: Indigenous pathways to decolonization
and sustainable self-determination.” Decolonization: Indigeneity, Education &
Society. 1(1) (2012), p. 92.
18 Fontaine, Tim. “Canada removing objector status to UN Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples.” CBC News. May 8, 2016. Available at: https://
www.cbc.ca/news/indigenous/canada-position-un-declaration-indigenous-peoples-
1.3572777
19 Only two other countries have passed domestic legislation to implement UNDRIP:
Bolivia in 2007 adopted Law No. 3760 which made UNDRIP part of its
domestic law, and later UNDRIP became part of Bolivia’s constitution in 2010. "e
second country is the Republic of Congo, which in 2010 adopted a “Law for the
Promotion and Protection of Indigenous Populations, which was heavily inspired
by the UNDRIP and substantially reproduces most of the articles of the Declara91
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
tion.” For more details, see Lenzerini, Federico. “Implementation of the UNDRIP
around the world: achievements and future perspectives. "e outcome of the work
of the ILA Committee on the Implementation of the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.”
!e International Journal of Human Rights. 23(1-2): 51-62 (2019).
20 O’Callaghan, Kevin and Madison Grist. “With DRIPA as Law, What Can We
Expect?” Indigenous Law Bulletin. December 16, 2019. Available at: https://www.
fasken.com/en/knowledge/2019/12/with-dripa-as-law-what-can-we-expect/
21 Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. Prevention of Racial
Discrimination, Including Early Warning and Urgent Action Procedure. Decision
1(100) (25 November -13 December 2019). Available at: https://tbinternet.
ohchr.org/Treaties/CERD/Shared%20Documents/CAN/INT_CERD_EWU_
CAN_9026_E.pdf
22 Hyslop, Katie. “Wet’suwet’en Crisis: Whose Rule of Law?”. !e Tyee (February
14, 2020). Available at: https://thetyee.ca/News/2020/02/14/Wetsuweten-Crisis-
Whose-Rule-Law/
23 Coulthard, Red Skin White Masks, p. 179.
24 Estes, Our History is the Future, p. 232.
25 Simpson, Leanne. Dancing On Our Turtle’s Back: Stories of Nishnaabeg Re-Creation,
Resurgence, and a New Emergence (Winnipeg: Arbeiter Ring Press, 2011). p.
69.
26 Simpson, As We Have Always Done, p. 58.
27 Coulthard, Red Skin White Masks, p. 151.
28 Here is the full quote from Patrick Wolfe’s essay: “Settler colonizers come to stay:
invasion is a structure not an event.” Patrick Wolfe, “Settler Colonialism and the
Elimination of the Native,” Journal of Genocide Research 8(4) (2006): 388.
29 Corey Snelgrove, Rita Kaur Dhamoon and Je! Corntassel. “Unsettling settler
colonialism: "e discourse and politics of settlers, and solidarity with Indigenous
nations.” Decolonization: Indigeneity, Education & Society. 3(2) (2014): 2.
30 Ibid.
31 J. Kehaulani Kauanui. ““A Structure, Not an Event”: Settler Colonialism and
Enduring Indigeneity.” Lateral. 5(1) (2016). Available at: https://csalateral.org/issue/
5-1/forum-alt-humanities-settler-colonialism-enduring-indigeneity-kauanui/
32 Ibid.
33 Quote in Simpson, As We Have Always Done, p. 104.
34 Michael Elliott. “Indigenous Resurgence: "e Drive for Renewed Engagement
and Reciprocity in the Turn Away from the State.” Canadian Journal of Political
Science. 51:1 (March / 2018): 73.
35 For more on this, see Chapter 12: “Treaties Between Indian Nations” of Deloria,
Vine, Jr. and Raymond J. DeMallie. Documents of American Indian Diplomacy:
Treaties, Agreements, and Conventions, 1775-1979 (Norman: University of Oklahoma
Press, 1999); Chapter 4: “Nishnaabeg Internationalism” in Simpson, Leanne. As
We Have Always Done: Indigenous Freedom through Radical Resistance (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 2017); Sheryl Lightfoot and David McDonald.
“Treaty Relations between Indigenous Peoples: Advancing Global Understandings
of Self-Determination.” New Diversities. 19(2) (2017): 25-39; Je! Corntassel and
92
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Marc Woons. “Indigenous Perspectives on International Relations.” In Stephen
McGlinchey, Rosie Walters and Christian Scheinp%ug, eds. International Relations
!eory. London: E-International Relations Publishing (2018). pp. 131-137.
36 See for example: Je! Corntassel and Ti!anie Hardbarger. “Educate to perpetuate:
Land-based pedagogies and community resurgence.” International Review
of Education. 65 (2019): 87–116; Je! Corntassel, Taiaiake Alfred, Noelani Goodyear–
Ka‘opua, Noenoe Silva, Hokulani Aikau, and Devi Mucina, eds. Everyday
Acts of Resurgence: People, Places, Practices (Olympia: Daykeeper Press, 2018); Je!
Corntassel and Mick Scow. “Everyday Acts of Resurgence: Indigenous Approaches
to Everydayness in Fatherhood.” New Diversities. 19(2) (2017): 55-68.
37 Corntassel and Hardbarger, “Educate to Perpetuate,” pp. 91-93.
38 Estes, Our History is the Future, p. 19
39 Wyton, Moira. “’A new era’: First Nations celebrate new signatories to historic
Bu!alo Treaty in Maskwacis.” Edmonton Journal (September 20, 2019). Available
at: https://edmontonjournal.com/news/local-news/a-new-era-$rst-nations-celebrate-
new-signatories-to-historic-bu!alo-treaty-in-maskwacis; for more details,
see Je! Corntassel and Marc Woons. “Indigenous Perspectives on International
Relations.” In Stephen McGlinchey, Rosie Walters and Christian Scheinp%ug, eds.
International Relations !eory. (London: E-International Relations Publishing,
2018). pp. 131-137.
40 Sheryl Lightfoot and David McDonald. “Treaty Relations between Indigenous
Peoples: Advancing Global Understandings of Self-Determination.” New Diversities.
19(2) (2017): 30-33.
41 Pennie Opal Plant. “Historic Indigenous Women’s Treaty Calls For Action for the
Earth.” Movement Rights (November 11, 2015). Available at: https://www.movementrights.
org/historic-indigenous-womens-treaty-calls-for-action-for-the-earth/
42 Carey L. Biron. “"at river has rights: new strategy to protect planet.” Reuters
(June 30, 2019). Available at: https://www.reuters.com/article/us-rights-natureusa/
that-river-has-rights-new-strategy-to-protect-planet-idUSKCN1UQ0E9
43 Plant, Historic Indigenous Women’s Treaty.
44 “Indigenous Women of the Americas Defenders of Mother Earth Treaty Compact
2015.” Indigenous Environmental Network (2015). Available at: https://www.
ienearth.org/indigenous-women-of-the-americas-defenders-of-mother-earthtreaty-
compact-2015/
45 Ryan Erwin. “Heiltsuk and Haida nations $nalize peace treaty.” Global News
(June 30, 2015). Available at: https://globalnews.ca/news/2085293/heiltsuk-andhaida-
nations-$nalize-peace-treaty/
46 In Suzanne van der Porten, Je! Corntassel, and Devi Mucina. “Indigenous
nationhood and herring governance: strategies for the reassertion of Indigenous
authority and inter-Indigenous solidarity regarding marine resources.” AlterNative:
An International Journal of Indigenous People. 15(1) (January 2019): 8.
47 Heiltsuk Tribal Council. “Heiltsuk Nation Prepares to Protect Herring Stocks,
Closes Commercial Sac Roe Fishery.” (March 20, 2015). Available at: https://www.
heiltsuknation.ca/heiltsuk-nation-prepares-to-protect-herring-stocks-closes-commercial-
sac-roe-$shery/#more-2502
93
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
48 van der Porten et al, “Indigenous nationhood and herring governance,” pp. 9-10.
49 Coastal First Nations. “Haida and Heiltsuk Women Rising.” (April 11, 2018).
Available at: https://coastal$rstnations.ca/haida-and-heiltsuk-women-rising/
50 Barrera, Jorge. “‘Together we can make it better:’ Mohawk faithkeeper explains
the spiritual importance of Tyendinaga.” CBC (February 20, 2020). Available at:
https://www.cbc.ca/news/indigenous/tyendinaga-mohawk-faithkeeper-spirituality-
1.5469305
51 Ibid.
52 Abedi, Maham. “Why the 1990 Oka Crisis is being evoked amid the Wet’suwet’en
pipeline dispute.” Global News (February 18, 2020). Available at: https://globalnews.
ca/news/6563932/oka-crisis-1990-wetsuweten-protests/
53 Henriques, Brittany. “Wet’suwet’en hereditary chiefs arrive in Kahnawake for historic
meeting.” Global News (February 22, 2020). Available at: https://globalnews.
ca/news/6583562/wetsuweten-hereditary-chiefs-kahnawake/
54 Ibid.
55 Estes, Our History is the Future, p. 131.
References
Abedi, Maham. “Why the 1990 Oka Crisis is being evoked amid
the Wet’suwet’en pipeline dispute.” Global News, February 18,
2020. Available at: https://globalnews.ca/news/6563932/oka-crisis-
1990-wetsuweten-protests/
Alfred, Taiaiake. Wasáse: Indigenous Pathways of Action and Freedom.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2005.
Amnesty International. Out of Sight, Out of Mind: Gender, Indigenous
Rights, and Energy Development in Northeast British Columbia,
Canada. 2016.
Barrera, Jorge. “‘Together we can make it better:’ Mohawk faithkeeper
explains the spiritual importance of Tyendinaga.” CBC, February
20, 2020. Available at: https://www.cbc.ca/news/indigenous/tyendinaga-
mohawk-faithkeeper-spirituality-1.5469305
Biron, Carey L. “"at river has rights: new strategy to protect planet.”
Reuters, June 30, 2019. Available at: https://www.reuters.com/article/
us-rights-nature-usa/that-river-has-rights-new-strategy-to-protectplanet-
idUSKCN1UQ0E9
Coastal First Nations. “Haida and Heiltsuk Women Rising.” April 11,
94
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
2018. Available at: https://coastal$rstnations.ca/haida-and-heiltsukwomen-
rising/
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. Prevention
of Racial Discrimination, Including Early Warning and Urgent Action
Procedure. Decision 1(100) 25 November -13 December 2019.
Available at: https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/Treaties/CERD/Shared%20
Documents/CAN/INT_CERD_EWU_CAN_9026_E.pdf
Corntassel, Je!. “Re-Envisioning Resurgence: Indigenous Pathways
to Decolonization and Sustainable Self-Determination.” Decolonization:
Indigeneity, Education and Society 1(1): 86-101. 2012.
Corntassel, Je! and Mick Scow. “Everyday Acts of Resurgence: Indigenous
Approaches to Everydayness in Fatherhood.” New Diversities.
19(2): 55-68, 2017.
Corntassel, Je! and Marc Woons. “Indigenous Perspectives on
International Relations.” In Stephen McGlinchey, Rosie Walters and
Christian Scheinp%ug, eds. International Relations !eory. London:
E-International Relations Publishing, 2018. Pps. 131-137.
Corntassel, Je!, Taiaiake Alfred, Noelani Goodyear–Ka‘opua, Noenoe
Silva, Hokulani Aikau, and Devi Mucina, eds. Everyday Acts
of Resurgence: People, Places, Practices. Olympia: Daykeeper Press,
2018.
Corntassel, Je! and Ti!anie Hardbarger. “Educate to perpetuate:
Land-based pedagogies and community resurgence.” International
Review of Education. 65: 87–116, 2019.
Coulthard, Glen. Red Skin, White Masks: Rejecting the Colonial
Politics of Recognition. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
2014.
Deloria, Vine, Jr. and Raymond J. DeMallie. Documents of American
Indian Diplomacy: Treaties, Agreements, and Conventions, 1775-1979.
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1999.
95
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Elliott, Michael “Indigenous Resurgence: "e Drive for Renewed Engagement
and Reciprocity in the Turn Away from the State.” Canadian
Journal of Political Science. 51:1: 61-81, March / 2018.
Erwin, Ryan. “Heiltsuk and Haida nations $nalize peace treaty.”
Global News, June 30, 2015. Available at: https://globalnews.ca/
news/2085293/heiltsuk-and-haida-nations-$nalize-peace-treaty/
Estes, Nick. Our History is the Future: Standing Rock versus the Dakota
Access Pipeline, and the Long Tradition of Indigenous Resistance.
New York: Verso, 2019.
Firelight Group. Indigenous Communities and Industrial Camps: Promoting
Healthy Communities in Settings of Industrial Change. February
2017.
Fontaine, Tim. “Canada removing objector status to UN Declaration
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.” CBC News. May 8, 2016. Available
at: https://www.cbc.ca/news/indigenous/canada-position-undeclaration-
indigenous-peoples-1.3572777
Goodyear-Ka’opua, Noelani. !e Seeds We Planted: Portraits of a Native
Hawaiian Charter School. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 2013.
Heiltsuk Tribal Council. “Heiltsuk Nation Prepares to Protect
Herring Stocks, Closes Commercial Sac Roe Fishery.” March 20,
2015. Available at: https://www.heiltsuknation.ca/heiltsuk-nationprepares-
to-protect-herring-stocks-closes-commercial-sac-roe-
$shery/#more-2502
Henriques, Brittany. “Wet’suwet’en hereditary chiefs arrive in Kahnawake
for historic meeting.” Global News, February 22, 2020. Available
at: https://globalnews.ca/news/6583562/wetsuweten-hereditarychiefs-
kahnawake/
Hosgood, Amanda Follett. “Emotions High as RCMP Arrest Seven
at Last Wet’suwet’en Post.” !e Tyee. February 10, 2020. Available
96
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
at: https://thetyee.ca/News/2020/02/10/Emotions-High-Unistoten-
Arrests/
Hyslop, Katie. “Wet’suwet’en Crisis: Whose Rule of Law?”. !e Tyee,
February 14, 2020. Available at: https://thetyee.ca/News/2020/02/14/
Wetsuweten-Crisis-Whose-Rule-Law/
Kauanui, J. Kehaulani. ““A Structure, Not an Event”: Settler Colonialism
and Enduring Indigeneity.” Lateral. 5(1), 2016. Available at:
https://csalateral.org/issue/5-1/forum-alt-humanities-settler-colonialism-
enduring-indigeneity-kauanui/
Lenzerini, Federico. “Implementation of the UNDRIP around the
world: achievements and future perspectives. "e outcome of the
work of the ILA Committee on the Implementation of the Rights
of Indigenous Peoples.” !e International Journal of Human Rights.
23(1-2): 51-62, 2019.
Lightfoot, Sheryl and David McDonald. “Treaty Relations between
Indigenous Peoples: Advancing Global Understandings of Self-Determination.”
New Diversities. 19(2): 25-39, 2017.
Lightfoot, Sheryl R. “"e Pessimism Traps of Indigenous Resurgence.”
In Tim Stevens and Nicholas Michelsen, eds. Pessimism in
International Relations. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan, 2019. pp. pp
155-172.
Murphy, Michael. “Indigenous Peoples and the Struggle for Self-
Determination: A Relational Strategy.” Canadian Journal of Human
Rights 8(1): 67-102, 2019.
n.a. “Indigenous Women of the Americas Defenders of Mother Earth
Treaty Compact 2015.” Indigenous Environmental Network, 2015.
Available at: https://www.ienearth.org/indigenous-women-of-theamericas-
defenders-of-mother-earth-treaty-compact-2015/
O’Callaghan, Kevin and Madison Grist. “With DRIPA as Law, What
Can We Expect?” Indigenous Law Bulletin. December 16, 2019.
97
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Available at: https://www.fasken.com/en/knowledge/2019/12/withdripa-
as-law-what-can-we-expect/
Plant, Pennie Opal. “Historic Indigenous Women’s Treaty Calls For
Action for the Earth.” Movement Rights, November 11, 2015. Available
at: https://www.movementrights.org/historic-indigenous-womens-
treaty-calls-for-action-for-the-earth/
Simpson, Leanne. Dancing On Our Turtle’s Back: Stories of Nishnaabeg
Re-Creation, Resurgence, and a New Emergence. Winnipeg:
Arbeiter Ring, 2011.
Simpson, Leanne. As We Have Always Done: Indigenous Freedom
through Radical Resistance. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 2017.
Snelgrove, Corey, Rita Kaur Dhamoon and Je! Corntassel. “Unsettling
settler colonialism: "e discourse and politics of settlers, and
solidarity with Indigenous nations.” Decolonization: Indigeneity,
Education & Society. 3(2): 1-32. 2014.
van der Porten, Suzanne, Je! Corntassel, and Devi Mucina. “Indigenous
nationhood and herring governance: strategies for the
reassertion of Indigenous authority and inter-Indigenous solidarity
regarding marine resources.” AlterNative: An International Journal of
Indigenous People. 15(1): 1-13, January 2019.
Wolfe, Patrick. “Settler Colonialism and the Elimination of the Native,”
Journal of Genocide Research 8(4): 387-409, 2006.
Wyton, Moira. “’A new era’: First Nations celebrate new signatories
to historic Bu!alo Treaty in Maskwacis.” Edmonton Journal, September
20, 2019. Available at: https://edmontonjournal.com/news/localnews/
a-new-era-$rst-nations-celebrate-new-signatories-to-historicbu
!alo-treaty-in-maskwacis


43
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Land and Liberty:
Settler Acknowledgement in
Anarchist Pedagogies of Place
!eresa Warburton*+
Introduction
In the summer of 2012, much of the activism in Western New York
State (WNY) was rooted in the practices and language that had
emerged from Occupy Wall Street about a year earlier. As in many
other cities across the country, the Occupy movement had a signi"-
cant impact on activist communities in Bu#alo and Rochester, where
the local encampments and related organizing bodies grew quickly,
bringing anarchist principles and practices more into a mainstream
public than they had been since the 1999 protests against the World
Trade Organization (WTO) in Seattle.
As the harsh winter conditions for which WNY is known for gave
way to warmer weather, the store of energies collected during those
months continued. One particularly well-attended and well-covered
event was the Rochester Anti-Capitalist March, held in July of 2012.
With reports of between 75 and 150 participants, the march became
a ‘hot-button’ item of the summer in the region a$er Rochester
*!eresa Warburton is an Associate Professor in the Department of English at
Western Washington University, where she is also a%liated faculty in Canadian-
American and Women’s, Gender, and Sexuality Studies. Her book,&Other Worlds
Here: Honoring Native Women’s Writing in Contemporary Anarchist Movements,
is forthcoming from Northwestern University Press in April 2021. Along with
Cowlitz writer Elissa Washuta, she is also the co-editor of&Shapes of Native Non!ction:
Collected Essays by Contemporary Writers,&which was a "nalist for the Washington
State Book Award. Her work has appeared in&Studies in American Indian
Literatures, Cultural Studies/Critical Methodologies, Upping the Anti,&and&Perspectives
on Anarchist "eory, where she is also a member of the editorial collective.
+Portions of this article appear in Chapter 1 of Other Worlds Here: Honoring Native
Women’s Writing in Contemporary Anarchist Movements, part of the Critical
Insurgencies Series from Northwestern University Press edited by Jodi Byrd and
Michelle Wright. Copyright © 2021 by Northwestern University Press. Published
2021. All rights reserved.
44
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
police pepper-sprayed and arrested 18 peaceful protesters during the
event. As local anarchist organizer Shane Burley, who later authored
Fascism Today: What It Is and How to End It, observed “Rochester
Police Department today attacked a stream of peaceful protestors
with chemical weapons without provocation, arresting 18 people.
Many of these people were attacked, thrown on the ground, pepper
sprayed when in handcu#s, and done so without being asked to
comply with any requests.”1
!e incident in Rochester ignited a regional debate about the militarization
of police and their confrontational relationship with
ever-growing groups of activists a%liated with both speci"c Occupy
encampments and a national movement centered on anti-capitalism.
But this narrative does little to re'ect some of the challenges of organizing
in that expressly anarchist space, especially in pushing organizers
to consider what it means to do anti-capitalist work on occupied
territory—in this case, that of the Haudenosaunee (Iroquois)
Confederacy. And though this does not show up in coverage about
the abusive treatment of protestors, there was at least one relatively
contentious discussion about this topic that has remained in my
mind as a small, rough grain wearing away at something more signi
"cant lurking beneath. In it, I started to see not only the structure
of settlement being expressed in distinctly anarchist terms but also
the way that this structure was being willfully obscured not through
a denial of it but through its acknowledgement.
About a week before the march itself, organizers communicated
across the region using a Facebook event page. In one post, an organizer
suggested an aesthetic choice for marchers: “Just a thought,
anyone not covering their face can put on war paint.”2 !e ensuing
conversation, though perhaps marginal and inconsequential now
to many of those involved then, profoundly shaped my engagement
with anarchism because of how perfectly it captured the enduring issue
of how settlement as an ongoing process of colonialism becomes
normalized and re-made within anarchist spaces. In what followed,
I began to identify a form of engagement that I later came to understand
as “settler anarchism,” or a form of anarchist praxis that remakes
the structure of settlement using anarchist logics.
45
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
I am not particularly surprised or concerned by the initial use of the
term ‘war paint’ in an anarchist space. A$er all, these spaces exist
within rather than outside of the structures of settlement through
which the United States is constituted. To assume that anarchists,
simply by virtue of being anarchists, manage to avoid any socialization
into racialized, gendered, and settler structures would move
us away from the more di%cult conversations necessary to address
how such structures of violence and dispossession persist in spaces
expressly committed to eradicating them. In this way, the use of the
term itself is less my concern since its invocation is a relatively ubiquitous
one that is part of American discourse.
As I sit writing this, the celebration parade for the Kansas City
Chiefs’ victory in Super Bowl LIV is underway, complete with an
appearance from the team’s horse, “Warpaint.”3 And around the time
that this conversation concerning the Rochester Anti-Capitalist
March was happening, the American indie-rock band “Warpaint”
was enjoying worldwide success, projecting an aura that matched the
implications of their name, which founding member Emily Kokal
described this way: “It just feels intense…we wanted the band to
have a provocative kind of name…the idea of putting on war paint
to prepare for battle…it’s very seductive.”4 In each case, the use of
the term signals an invocation of broader tropes about Indigenous
peoples that have constructed them as hypersexualized and war-like
in an e#ort to justify violent repression through both implicit and
explicit claims to the moral superiority and civility of white settlers.5
It is no surprise that various anarchists working in the U.S. have
picked up and reproduced some of these tropes in our own spaces,
since their origins are both deeply engrained and purposefully obstructed
— much like settlement itself. !us, it is not my goal here to
simply point out that some anarchists in Western New York got into
a "ght on the Internet about the use of this pejorative term almost a
decade ago and that it is this utterance that provides cut-and-dry evidence
about the persistence of settlement in anarchist spaces. In fact,
this would only provide evidence of the persistence of settlement in
the American cultural discourse and anarchists’ interpellation into
that discourse. Not so insightful. Instead, what this conversation
46
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
shows us is that the structure of settlement is maintained in anarchist
spaces through what happens a$er we recognize this interpellation.
!at is, it is not the utterance itself that shows us something important:
it is the subsequent acknowledgement that there is a lack of
active engagement with and responsibility to Native nations coupled
with a failure to engage that lack through the praxis being evidenced
in the conversation itself.
A$er the initial post, the "rst comment was made by a local white
anarchist man pushing against the suggestion and its framing: “it
would be really sad and fucked up were there to be white people
wearing ‘war paint’ at this march that they are having on Haudenosaunee
land.” Other white anarchist men quickly jumped into the
fray and escalated the conversation. !e person who had initially
pointed to the pejorative connotations of the term ‘war paint’ responded
to the claim that “war paint does have a historical presence
in plenty of parts of Europe” with a clear citation of the term’s roots
in 19th century American discourse about Native peoples. He noted
that although “plenty of people have painted their bodies throughout
time for all sorts of reasons, the term ‘war paint’ is a relatively recent
term invented by white settlers to project warlike characteristics
onto the Indigenous people who they were trying to exterminate.”
Even further, he suggested that this conversation lent insight into the
lack of Native participation in anarchist movements in the region
and more broadly. Multiple white anarchist men, including one very
prominent one who would later be outed as a serial sexual harasser,
took particular issue with this "nal point.
He noted “this is literally the "rst time I’ve heard the term used
in anti-capitalist circles…I’d imagine that the low participation of
Indigenous people in this sort of event runs a good deal deeper than
the use or defense of the term. To claim otherwise seems like a real
simpli"cation of a much more substantive problem of connection
and depth.” And, in a return of the aggressive-internet-anarchist-activist
participation in the conversation, another local white anarchist
man (likely unknowingly) o#ered a fairly succinct summary of the
host of problems with anarchist approaches to settlement framed by
this conversation:
47
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
“If you’re wondering why the Indigenous [sic] are not
'ocking to ‘our’ movement it’s de"nitely not because
people decided to use let alone say ‘war paint’. !at’s
oversimpli"cation and white liberal guilt bullshit that’s
been slammed down our throats trying to make me
guilty for something my ancestor did. Fuck. !at. Shit.
Why don’t you tell my mixed partner to go back to Europe
right? Or maybe Africa? Or how about she tells you
to fuck o# because she’s also a tiny bit native [sic].”
What has always been the most compelling part of this conversation
to me has been this turn — the move from a defense of this kind of
pejorative term to a de'ection of responsibility for the persistence of
settler structures within anarchist movements, even as such a problem
is admitted with ease. What is more, both the defense and the de-
'ection are meted out through heteronormative logics, evidenced in
the invocation of the commenter’s ‘mixed partner’ who is ‘a tiny bit
native’ but who never comments or speaks for herself. We aren’t even
certain whether she exists. It is the structure of this engagement, and
the form of political analysis that it gives us, that interests me most. I
see it replicated o$en, across time and place. Because of this, it seems
worthwhile to attempt to unpack it here.
In what follows, I am interested in exploring how this interaction is
not unique but, rather, symptomatic of broader engagements with
the question of settlement in contemporary anarchist spaces. Rather
than focus on providing an expositional archive of moments like
this, where it becomes abundantly clear that most anarchists have
not adequately dealt with the question of settlement within (or without)
our movements despite the continued participation of Indigenous
peoples in them as well as in radical social movements more
broadly, I aim instead to use this moment as a way to sketch out
an anarchist form of engagement that ends up informing our praxis
across a range of issues.
In short, this conversation provides an opportunity to better attend
to these issues of anarchist praxis and how they limit our ability to
adequately recognize, account for, and address the persistence of
48
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
settler structures in anarchist politics. I use the term ‘praxis’ here because,
as I mentioned above, this is an issue of how we choose to live
the politics we espouse, rather than simply a theoretical rumination
on why the structure of settlement persists in anarchist spaces.
In what follows, I unpack the particular issue of land acknowledgements
as a pedagogical praxis in order to guide us into a broader
conversation about how most anarchists in the U.S. have failed to
reckon with the question of doing anarchist work in a settler colonial
context leading up and into the 21st century. I end with a brief
re'ection on how anarchists might draw on the work of Native storytellers,
activists, and intellectuals to reorient our understanding of
the relationships between place and politics in ways that enable us to
better confront the structures of power we seek to destroy.
Pedagogy, Praxis, and Land
In order to bring out the contours of this conversation, I begin here
by bringing two things together: pedagogies of anarchist praxis and
the practice of land acknowledgements. I take the "rst term from
a symposium organized by Kanaka Maoli scholar and activist J.
Kehaulani Kauanui at Wesleyan University in Spring 2019, where a
version of this paper was "rst presented. For me, this term emphasizes
a focus on the methods we use to learn and engage anarchist
praxis, rather than focusing only on the contours of the practices
themselves.
I take up the second term because I see land acknowledgements, as
well, as a pedagogy of practice. What is more, I believe that current
prominent debates about formal land acknowledgements within
Native and Indigenous Studies as they become a more ubiquitous
practice across the U.S. and Canada provide a useful epistemic
method through which to engage the broader questions with which
this piece is concerned. In these debates, which I outline more indepth
below, I locate some of the same core questions that emerge
from the conversation above: how do we use acknowledgements
(whether of history, of harm, of presence, of absence, of persistence,
of responsibility, or of culpability) to shape what comes a$er? !at is,
49
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
how do they structure our pedagogies of praxis once they have been
recognized? What are the current limitations of these practices and
how might we reimagine them to align our methods with our desires
for the worlds we make together?
In the "rst case, I want to turn especially to the term “pedagogy,”
which I view as central to anarchism. For me, the emphasis on pedagogy
has been one of the things that elevates anarchism as not only a
viable political but ethical practice. As David Graeber has observed,
this is one of the qualities that makes anarchism a more fertile
method of political organizing than other radical strands because of
its grounding in particular practices instead of particular luminaries.
He argues that:
one need only to compare the historical schools of Marxism
and anarchism…to see we are dealing with fundamentally
di#erent things. Marxist schools have founders.
Just as Marxism sprang from the mind of Marx, so we
have Leninists, Maoists, Trotskyites, Gramscians, Althusserians…
Schools of anarchism, in contrast, emerge from
some kind of organizational principle or form of practice:
Anarcho-Syndicalists and Anarcho-Communists, Insurrectionists
and Platformists, Cooperativists, Individualists,
and so on.6
It follows from Graeber that this nomenclature signals a distinctive
quality of anarchist politics, namely its ability to grow and adapt
through practice rather than its adherence to a strict ideological
foundation. I agree with him that this is one of the things that makes
anarchism a particularly salient form of political and social organizing
in an era of neoliberalism, since it is able to better account for
di#use, dynamic structures of power and capital.
What I want to emphasize here is how intimately this promise of
adaptability is tied to pedagogy, both functionally and formally. To
understand foundational anarchist practices like pre"gurative politics,
consensus-based decision-making, and direct democracy simply
as examples of practices that are in-line with anarchist theory, is to
50
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
ignore the pedagogical role that such practices have. !at is, these
are not merely exercises we learn and then execute as a way of making
anarchist worlds—they are practices we exercise in order to learn
how to make those worlds and to care for them as we do. As famed
scholar of pedagogy Paulo Freire reminds us, “the more radical the
person is, the more fully they enter into reality so that, knowing it
better, they can better transform it. !ey are not afraid to confront,
to listen, to see the world unveiled.”7 !e term ‘pedagogies of anarchist
praxis’ then, helps us to identify both the practical and didactic
qualities of our interactions with each other and with the multiple
worlds in which we live. What is more, it can help us reframe contention
away from a focus on how to convince one another that we
are right and, instead, to focus on the question: how and what are we
learning to be through this? !is is what I hope for anarchism, in its
most realized pedagogical praxis.
Now, let us put a pin in that and pivot for a moment to another practice
connected to pedagogy, that of land acknowledgements. !is
practice of recognizing the traditional territories of local Indigenous
communities has become more popular in the U.S., following its
institutionalization in other settler colonial contexts like Canada and
Australia. Its purpose is ostensibly making us aware of Indigenous
presence, to acknowledge that the work we do has a material foundation
in the land and its people. Following Lila Asher, Joe Curow, and
Amil Davis, I also see this praxis as a form of pedagogy or a teaching
method that, aspirationally at least, aims to anchor our work in not
only the ideological but also the material realities of doing this work
on occupied land.8 Such land acknowledgements are acts of protocol
or procedures that establish the contours of our forms of relation
with the land and its people in a dynamic way. !at is, these acknowledgements
are not a static naming of a given place but, rather,
a commitment to respecting the protocols of relation that live with
the land and its people. !ey are not a quick resolution of settlement
in a given space, uttered at the beginning of any event so that we may
move on to what was important to begin with.
Except, of course, when they are. And o$en, they are.
51
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Many universities, including my current institution, have established
formal land acknowledgements that are meant to be printed and
read aloud at campus events; people have started putting traditional
territories in their email signatures, along with their pronouns, titles,
and o%ce phone numbers. In Canada, land acknowledgements are
popular before hockey games or at meetings of Parliament. And,
more and more, radical groups are opening meetings and events
with some form of land or territorial acknowledgement.9 As numerous
scholars and activists have pointed out, this proliferation of land
acknowledgements across the U.S. and Canada has not necessarily
transformed the ways of relating manifested through and in the
service of settlement. In fact, for many, it has further entrenched the
structure of settlement through what Eve Tuck (Unangax) and K.
Wayne Yang have termed “settler moves to innocence.”10 As Asher,
Curow, and Davis note “by taking what has been, in some nations,
a diplomatic protocol, gutting it of its ontological and relational
context, and repurposing it to legitimate settlers’ continued presence
on stolen land,” land acknowledgements act as a reinscription of settler
control over Native land rather than a pedagogical practice that
foments the return of Native land to Native people and an adherence
to local protocols and relations.11
!is is precisely the kind of discomfort that Anishinaabe scholar
Hayden King noted when he spoke recently on his regret at having
participated in writing a formal land acknowledgement for Ryerson
University. In an interview with Cree writer and poet Rosanna Deerchild
for Unreserved, a CBC radio show focused on stories and music
from across Indigenous Canada,12 King discussed how the life that
the acknowledgement took on a$er he helped to pen it helped him
to “see how the territorial acknowledgement could become very super
"cial and also how it sort of fetishizes these actual tangible treaties.
!ey’re not metaphors—they’re real institutions, and for us to
write and recite a territorial acknowledgement that sort of obscures
that fact, I think we do a disservice to that treaty and to those nations.”
13 What King highlights here is a question of pedagogy. !at is,
his worry is not that acknowledging the territory and its people is an
inherently alienating practice but that the way it is being done is not
accomplishing the task for which it has ostensibly been adopted. !is
52
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
is precisely what Cree and Métis writer Chelsea Vowel has pointed
to in her argument that territorial acknowledgements must be “sites
of disruption” and that, to do this, perhaps we must move “beyond
territorial acknowledgements to ask the hard questions about what
needs to be done once we’re ‘aware of Indigenous presence.”14
So now, unpinning this question of pedagogies of anarchist praxis,
I am interested in how anarchist pedagogies, or methods of sharing
knowledge and skills, have been limited by the things to which
the scholars I mentioned above have pointed to in their discussions
of land acknowledgements. Additionally, I am interested in how
we might move beyond that limit to create the sites of disruption
of which Vowel speaks. In the example I provided at the beginning
of this article, those anarchists pushing back against the critique of
the use of the term ‘war paint’ never underwrote their resistance
through a claim that relations between local Native communities
and local non-Native anarchists were strong. Rather, they acknowledged
that a problem existed, and it was this acknowledgement that
they used to eschew responsibility for it. Put another way, they used
their acknowledgement of the poor relationship between anarchism
and Native peoples as a way to mark their defense of both the term
and practice of donning ‘war paint’ in their anti-capitalist march on
Haudenosaunee land.
It is this tendency that I see replicated on a larger scale, so large that
it has become a de"nitive characteristic of a particular kind of anarchism
that emerged in the U.S. and Canada in the 21st century. What
is more, I see this as a failure to acknowledge the pedagogical imperative
of praxis. Pedagogy, as Freire notes, is inherently dynamic — it
transforms what comes a$er the moment of learning so that learning
becomes an unending continuum rather than a static location. In
the case of land acknowledgements, a pedagogical approach requires
the same: that we acknowledge and engage the land and its people
in a set of on-going relationships rather than as static surfaces upon
which we act. In what follows, I turn to a more extensive analysis of
the development of this particular anarchist tendency, which I refer
to as “settler anarchism,” in order to explore how this, as a form of
engagement, limits the ability of anarchists to reckon with the persis53
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
tence of structures of violence within our own communities.
‘Settler Anarchism’ in Seattle
What I aim to bring out through the comparison of pedagogies of
anarchist praxis and land acknowledgements in both the discussion
above and the example with which I began this article is a centering
of the question of how anarchists respond to the material, political,
and cultural realities in which we practice. Or, more pertinently,
how we don’t. In this case, I want to focus on what Graeber and
Andrej Grubacic have dubbed the ‘New Anarchism’ or the particular
strain of anarchism that emerged in the late 20th and early 21st
centuries in North America, usually associated with the type of mass
protests epitomized by those against the WTO in Seattle in 1999.15
As scholars like Graeber, Grubacic, Barbara Epstein, Richard Day,
and Todd May argue, this particular form of anarchism is usually
understood as arising alongside the shi$ towards a neoliberal global
political and economic order in the late 20th century and the crisis
of communism as a radical political alternative following the collapse
of the Soviet Union in 1991.16
!is genealogy of ‘New Anarchism’ is largely fomented around a
series of large-scale protests throughout the 1990s and 2000s aimed
at the World Bank (WB), WTO, and International Monetary Fund
(IMF), including the interruption of the 50th celebration of the IMF
and the WB in Madrid in 1994; the “Carnival Against Capital” coinciding
with the meeting of the G8 (Group of 8 Industrialized Countries)
and the third ministerial conference of the WTO in 1999; protests
against the meetings of the WB and IMF in Washington DC in
2000; protests against the “Summit of the Americas” in Québec City
and the meeting of the G8 in Genoa in 2001; and protests against
the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) negotiations in Miami
in 2003. !e proliferation of anti-capitalist organizing committed to
horizontalism signaled the arrival of a new era of global resistance to
neoliberalism that has been referred to by numerous names including
‘anti-globalization,’ ‘alter-globalization,’ and ‘global justice’.17
!is resurgence of anarchism as a primary mode of social movement
was particularly in'uential in North America. Fresh from the back54
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
lash in the 1980s against the advances of the radical struggles of the
1960s and 1970s, the resurgence of radical social movements in the
1990s evidenced a renewed tradition of le$ist uprising. Due in part
to the success of large-scale protests, this era of social movements
became de"ned both by anarchist commitments to anti-statism and
anti-capitalism and to anarchist tactics of direct action and a%nitybased
organizing. In this sense, resurgence marked the emergence of
a new form of anarchism in North America. In terming the myriad
participants in these events ‘New Anarchists,’ Graeber sought to
emphasize an emphatic commitment to anti-state and anti-capitalist
politics in tune with, earlier generations of North American anarchists.
However, ‘New Anarchists’ had moved away from the foundations
of syndicalism and transatlantic immigration upon which
many mid-nineteenth and early twentieth-century anarchist movements
had been built. Incorporating the legacies of radical social
movements in North America, ‘New Anarchism’ was de"ned instead
by its inherently globalized character, epitomized by the o$-used
tag-line “as global as capital.”
Here, I am interested in ‘New Anarchism’ in particular because it
helps us to point to a form of anarchism that developed in response
to a particular historical moment within the context of a particular
place. Of course, contemporary anarchism does not belong to anarchists
in the U.S., but ‘New Anarchism’ is a useful term for asking the
questions: what is particular about this form of emergent anarchism,
especially in the U.S., during this period? And how is it related to
the material conditions in which it rose? Much of the talk about the
rise of ‘New Anarchism’ has centered on questions of neoliberalism,
globalization, and imperialism. One of the ways that scholars and activists
have sought to answer these questions has been to emphasize
the central role that the U.S. has played in establishing a global neoliberal
order. Scholars like Naomi Klein, Edward S. Herman, Noam
Chomsky, and Joseph Stiglitz have documented the central role that
the U.S. played in the development of this global order while antiwar
and anti-militarism activists mobilized around the deep connections
between American corporatism and imperial war, especially in
Iraq and Afghanistan.18
55
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
In these cases, radical U.S. scholars and activists took seriously the
responsibility they had to critique their own government’s interventions
in the global world. In doing so, they also sought to make
horizontal connections with other activists and organizers around
the world that subverted hierarchical models for engagement across
the Global North and Global South mirroring the supra-national
organizations on which the proliferation of global neoliberalism
depended. As a young person coming to political consciousness
during this time, these connections had a profound in'uence on my
own political growth and understanding of the global world. However,
I have begun to worry about the how the continued suturing
together of the stories of ‘New Anarchism’ and neoliberal globalization
actually serves to obscure, rather than illuminate, the question
of how anarchism in the U.S. is related to the material conditions in
which it rises. Namely, I think the urgency of needing to place ‘New
Anarchism’ within this narrative of global justice, and to insist on its
participation in a transnational movement, has meant ignoring the
necessary questions of place that come with doing work in a settler
colonial context.
As a result, I fear that many U.S. based anarchists have not only
ignored the question of how settlement a#ects our work, but have
come to depend so heavily on the assumption that anarchism is inherently
in con'ict with settlement that we have ended up remaking
settlement paradigms within anarchist spaces using anarchist logics.
!at is, what I see is that the commitment to taking up the responsibility
of U.S. activists to engage critically with the state that acts
globally in their name has meant consistently locating the exaction
of U.S. empire out there without recognizing the structure of settlement
in here. In doing so, we have reinscribed an ordering of space,
time, and nation that does the work of the U.S. settler state in anarchist
terms, using the critique of U.S. imperialism to create distinct
ideas of what count as a ‘domestic’ or ‘foreign’ space which, as Amy
Kaplan has pointed out, has been essential to the maintenance of the
particular brand of exceptionalism that denies the existence of U.S.
empire.19 In the case of ‘New Anarchism’, this has meant a critical
insistence on confronting the central role that the U.S. has played in
the proliferation of global neoliberalism without su%cient concomi56
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
tant recognition of how settlement provided the literal foundation
for the resources, both material and ideological, that the U.S. has
used to mobilized this power since its founding.
As shorthand, I have come to refer to this as ‘settler anarchism’ or
a version of anarchism in the U.S. that not only replicates but has
remade dominant narratives and structures of settlement within our
own politics. !is is not about a politics of purity — I agree with
Alexis Shotwell that to commit to such a politics is to base our attempts
at ethical life on the assumption of a pure past to which we
can return. Of course, there is no ‘there’ there. As she argues, “all
there is, while things perpetually fall apart, is the possibility of acting
from where we are…!ere is not a pre-racial state we could access,
erasing histories of slavery, forced labor on railroads, colonialism,
genocide, and their concomitant responsibilities and requirements.”20
My use of the term ‘settler anarchism’ is a way of pointing out that
anarchists in the U.S. too rarely ask the question of ‘where we are’
and that this, is turn, has limited our ability to frame both our theoretical
and practical engagements in transformative ways. To build
on the example I gave at the beginning, let me turn to an instance
of this form of engagement in a more substantive place: in the very
origin story of ‘New Anarchism’ itself.
!e 1999 protest against the WTO in Seattle looms large in the story
of ‘New Anarchism’, where it is ubiquitously invoked as a type of
origin story. If you are reading a text about contemporary anarchism,
check the index—I bet Seattle is there. And this makes sense—it
is a great story. It’s a triumphant story, one that highlights the possibilities
of coalitions, of solidarity, of creativity, of radical a%nity,
and of direct action. It’s something to hold onto. But rarely in this
constant retelling of the protests is ‘Seattle as such’ anything more
than a backdrop. It becomes the setting, the material upon which
the action happens rather than a place with a history, people, and set
of relations that belong to it. Besides a few comments that suggest
the success of the protests owed something to the labor and radical
environmentalist history of the region, very few re'ections on the
protests and their organization consider the role that the place and
its life played in the events of those "ve days.
57
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
For instance, why was Seattle chosen as the meeting place for the
WTO in the "rst place? Why were local lawmakers and politicians so
compelled to host this global meeting? What role did Seattle play in
the development of a global neoliberalism? How was this connected
to local political, economic, and social issues? What were the hotbutton
issues in Washington State at the time and how might that
have a#ected the organizing strategies and outcomes of the protests?
!e specter of settlement unwrites each of these questions since,
as Tlingit writer Ernestine Hayes has pointed out, “place is not the
stage upon which events occur but is rather an active participant in
those events.”21 !at is, Seattle doesn’t just happen to be the place that
either the WTO meeting or these protests occurred. And, without an
engagement with these questions, we limit our understanding of the
role that the city and the region have played in both the structures
the protests were meant to confront and the ones that we still haven’t
be able to address.
In the 1990s Seattle was undergoing yet another arc of redevelopment
in the cycle of boom and bust that had characterized the city’s
identity since settlement began in the 19th century. When Seattle
beat out 40 other cities to host the 3rd ministerial meeting of the
WTO, this was part of a broader arc of redevelopment in which
multiple visions of what Seattle could be were coming into con'ict as
the city emerged from the Boeing Bust of the 1970s and 1980s into
the twenty-"rst century. As Sam Howe Verhovek noted in an article
covering the announcement of Seattle as the host city, “local leaders
were exultant. Here in what is o$en called the most trade-dependent
region of the nation, they said the meeting would be a chance to
show o# Seattle as a world-class center of high-tech innovation and a
friend to global trade.”22
In fact, establishing Seattle as an important terminal in global trade
networks was essential to the process of settlement in both the
region and the city itself. !roughout the 19th and 20th centuries,
the development of Seattle depended on this sense of it as a global
city, from the arrival of the transcontinental railroad in the 1880s,
to the successful "ght to become the southern site of the path north
during the Klondike Gold Rush in the 1890s, to the hosting of the
58
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Alaska Yukon Paci"c Exposition in 1909, to the region’s central role
in U.S. military intervention during both World Wars. Claiming Native
space and resources was always in the service of this globalized
vision of the city.23
!is is the history upon which politicians and businessmen drew
when they lobbied so hard to attract the WTO meeting to the region.
However, organizers tapped into a ‘narrative of place’ as well, keen to
show-o# the globally-minded nature of the city’s progressive heart.
As anti-WTO organizer Michael Dolan put it in 1999, “I was thrilled
when Seattle was selected… It’s almost like they’re giving us home-
"eld advantage. !ere are great labor unions here, great labor energy,
all these environmentalists.”24 !is sense of Seattle as a progressive,
environmentalist city whose disposition linked into broader global
sentiments was an essential one that the 1999 protests tapped into.
However, it was also rooted in associations of the region with a
Western frontier consolidated through settlement, with both coming
together in what famed author Tom Robbins’ has termed a “frontier
metropolis.”25 Robbins’ term captures the perception of Seattle as a
simultaneously ‘wild’ and ‘urban’ space on the edge of the world that
those inviting the WTO and opposing the WTO tapped into.
In this sense, ‘settler anarchism’ in the region persists through a
failure to consistently identify the connection between manifest
destiny and environmental conservation in the establishment of the
economic, political, and cultural ‘norms’ of the region. What is more,
this structure is constantly re-inculcated on a broader scale when the
speci"city of Seattle is unfailingly removed from the retelling of the
story of the 1999 protests across anarchist spaces as an origin story
of ‘New Anarchism’.
Let me o#er a speci"c example here to illustrate this point about how
a lack of attention to place has enabled the structure of settlement to
'ourish in ‘New Anarchism’. During the same year as protests against
the WTO in Seattle, Washington State was embroiled in the controversy
over Makah whaling. !is controversy had reignited tensions
over treaty rights that had characterized many Native and non-
Native relationships in Washington since the Fish Wars of the 1960s
59
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
and 1970s.26 A$er the grey whale was removed from the endangered
species list in 1994, the Makah made an appeal to the International
Whaling Commission (IWC) for the right to resume their traditional
whale hunt as secured in the 1855 Treaty of Neah Bay. As the Makah
moved to hunt a gray whale in the spring of 1999, the backlash
against their renewed hunting practices saw willful collusion between
right-wing politicians, radical environmentalists, and animal
rights organizations. As scholars Zoltán Grossman and Joshua L.
Reid (Snohomish) have documented, this resistance was characterized
by a distinctly anti-Native sentiment at worst and an ignorance
regarding sovereignty, indigeneity, treaty rights, and the law at best.27
!is is the context in which planning for the 1999 ‘Battle in Seattle’
was occurring. !is was a heated issue in Washington State, bringing
to the fore debates about tribal sovereignty, indigeneity, and environmental
conservation not only in both state and federal contexts,
but also on the international stage. It was closely covered by national
news media (including articles by the same New York Times
journalist who covered the protests) and was watched across Indian
Country since the outcome promised to set precedent for other challenges
to the limitation of Native treaty rights not only on national,
but supra-national stages. Despite both the intensity and prevalence
of the Makah whaling controversy in Washington State in 1999, it
rarely comes up in any of the materials re'ecting on the emergence,
e#ects, or legacy of the 1999 ‘Battle in Seattle’. !is is notable largely
because it was connected to the region in many ways, including an
overlapping of participants.
For instance, late environmentalist and animal rights activist Ben
White was intimately involved both in the WTO protests and activism
against the renewal of the Makah whale hunt. White “lived inside
WTO week in Seattle for at least ten months before it happened”
and the images of White’s sea turtle brigade, with protestors decked
out in cardboard sea turtle armor, are some of the most lasting from
the protests.28 During this time, he was also working with the Makah
to try to prevent them from resuming the whale hunt, issuing advertisements
in local newspapers from the organization “People for
the Makahs and Whales” that o#ered money to stop the whale hunt
60
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
as well as organizing presentations to the Makah Whaling Commission
to provide “historical background” related to protests against
the Makah that took place a$er the whaling permit was granted.29
He appears o$en in interviews about the controversy, speaking as a
“longtime environmental activist” who believed that the Makah had
not “considered the worldwide social and political consequences of
their actions.”30 And though White’s understanding of the topic isn’t
representative of the feelings of the diverse array of participants at
the 1999 protests, his ardent participation in both the planning of
the mass protests and resistance to the revitalization of the Makah
whale hunt demonstrates that these issues were overlapping.
!e legacies of this local Indigenous context are lost in the collective
recollection of the protests in ‘New Anarchist’ texts, especially those
dealing with the Battle in Seattle such as Eddie Yuen, George Katsia
"cas, and Daniel Burton Rose’s collection "e Battle in Seattle: "e
New Challenge to Capitalist Globalization or Janet !omas’ "e Battle
in Seattle: "e Story Behind and Beyond the WTO Demonstrations.
In fact, I looked in every text about anarchism in North America in
the 21st century that I could "nd and while the majority of them had
reference to (and o$en started with) the story of the 1999 Battle in
Seattle, none had a concerted attempt to reckon with the contemporaneous
history of the Makah Whaling Controversy—few even
mentioned it.31
!e fact that this is absent is not only a problem of omission but one
that demonstrates a lack of serious consideration of a core question:
What was happening in Seattle and in Washington State during
the lead up to the protests? How did this impact the structure and
legacies of the events that followed? Neglecting this question in the
"$een or so years of commemoration has meant an extended disavowal
of the important connections between trade, settlement, and
neoliberalism at the turn of the 21st century. !e fact that the Makah
whaling controversy and the meeting of WTO in Seattle were happening
simultaneously is no coincidence. Rather, they rose together
as part of the attempt to advance the long-lasting desire to secure for
Seattle a position as a central locus of trade in the global world.
61
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Global trade was an important dimension of the public discussions
surrounding the renewal of the Makah whale hunt. Both animal
rights activist Paul Watson and White routinely focused their resistance
to Makah whaling on their perception that the Makah would
attempt to sell whale meat to Japan — a charge that the Makah
Whaling Commission consistently rejected. Citing this as a matter of
international trade law, environmentalists like Watson invoked the
sovereignty of the U.S. settler state to intervene in the trade activities
of Native nations. In this way, anti-whaling activists drew on
long histories of using settler governance to restructure international
trade in ways that bene"tted the newly emerging U.S. state. As Reid
points out, attempts to prevent tribes from developing or maintaining
independent trade relationships with other nations was an essential
part of the treaty process during the late nineteenth century in
what was then Washington Territory. Reid reminds us that a$er the
territorial governor Isaac Stevens was unable to muster strong military
power through territorial militias, he “turned to the treaties to
encode some method of control,” which included preventing tribes
such as the Makah from trading with long-standing trade partners
and kin relations.32 In this sense, transnational trade issues were of
great concern to agents like Stevens in the mid-nineteenth century as
the U.S. was trying to establish itself as a global economic power; just
as they were for politicians, businessmen, and protestors alike at the
turn of the twenty-"rst century.
What would it mean to integrate this story into the story of the
Seattle protests? Why isn’t it deemed important, and what is at
stake? My sense is that part of the answer to this question is that the
Makah whaling issue belies what many assume is an easy parallel
between anarchism and Native sovereignty movements. However,
this assumption is relatively easily to do away with if one looks to
the plethora of work in anarchist studies more generally and realizes
how little, until recently, it dealt substantially with questions of
settlement in North America, particularly the United States.
Indeed, activists and scholars like Adam Gary Lewis, Adam Barker,
Craig Fortier, Nick Montgomery, and carla bergman, have o#ered
other critical approaches to these questions by exploring how non62
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Native activists might work to build more accountable and sustainable
relationships with Native nations, there is little work that
considers what it means to do anarchist work in a settler colonial
context.33 And the special issue of A#nities: A Journal of Radical
"eory, Culture, Action titled “Working Across Di#erence for Post-
Imperial Futures: Intersections Between Anarchism, Indigenism,
and Feminism” edited by Glen Sean Coulthard (Yellowknives Dene),
Jacqueline Lasky, Adam Lewis, and Vanessa Watts (Mohawk and
Anishnaabe) brings together articles that explore the connections
between anarchism, feminism, and indigenism; Indigenous feminism
and the nation-state; anarch@-Zapatismo; urban indigeneity
and international relationships; and Hawaiian nationhood within
activist spaces.34
In each of these cases, however, the focus is o$en on the intersection
between anarchism and indigeneity rather than anarchism and settlement.
So, then we need to get into the more complicated answer to
my question: that though there are important intersections between
anarchism and indigeneity, there might also be a relationship between
anarchism and settlement as well. And, if we acknowledge this
is an uneasy relationship, then we need to ask more di%cult questions,
such as how anarchists have at times slipped into upholding
the structure of settlement in the e#ort to advance anarchist politics.
!is seems to me exactly the kind of concern that people like King
and Vowel describe when they talk about land acknowledgements
becoming super"cial or fetishized. !at is, their vision for land
acknowledgement as a place-based pedagogy is one that draws on
the multiple stories that live with a place. !ey implore us, as settlers,
to center our relationship to that place, its people, and the promises
that have been made on our behalf. !e criticism is how acknowledgements
can be ‘managed’ in order to create a narrative that either
eludes the question of how to live up to the responsibilities of being
in relation to the land and its people or assumes that the answer is
a foregone ‘already taken care of ’ conclusion. !is is precisely what
happens when we de-link the story of the 1999 protests in Seattle
from any examination of the place itself, including complicated
histories of activism and settlement in the region, and allow the story
63
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
of ‘Seattle’ to become a broader stand-in for the story of ‘New Anarchism’.
!e relationship between the place and the movement that
emerged from a complicated set of long-standing relationships is no
longer part of the story. What is more, pedagogically, this perspective
doesn’t ask the necessary questions that can teach us to reckon with
the structure of settlement and what it means to do anarchist work
on Native land.
So, in my example, the story of the 1999 protests in Seattle does not
really become about Seattle at all, but rather about ‘New Anarchism’
itself. !is has implications beyond how we narrate the rise of ‘New
Anarchism’. What I’m interested in is how this example evidences
issues with how we structure the very questions we ask, how these
questions work pedagogically as a model for engagement, especially
when we think about the relationship between anarchism and other
movements or bodies of thought. In this example, an assumption
that anarchism and Native sovereignty are inherently aligned against
the state in Seattle-related literature has resulted in the replication of
the structure of settlement within anarchism itself, not because it has
made them one and the same but because it has prevented anarchists
from critically evaluating our movements as part of structures of
settlement. Recall the vignette with which I began this article: this
method of engagement has prevented us from being vigilant about
how we remake society even when we acknowledge structures of
settlement are an issue.
As in the rote repetition of a land acknowledgement, lack of critical
engagement leaves intact the foundation of ‘settlement’ in all
our ethical commitments. !e pedagogical form that emerges, one
of simultaneously acknowledging settlement without allowing such
an acknowledgement to lead us to a place-based method that transforms
our politics, prematurely settles transformative conversations.
Again, this is not an issue of purity but one of pedagogy. What happens
when we don’t center a place-based pedagogy in our approach
to anarchism? What happens when we don’t reckon with the material
reality of the U.S. as a settler colonial project in our praxis? What
happens when we use this pedagogical imperative only as a form of
acknowledgement instead of as a way of restructuring our relations?
64
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Conclusion
!e day before giving an earlier version of this paper at the Pedagogies
of Anarchist Praxis conference, I had the honor of chairing a
panel of Native students, sta#, faculty, and community members on
Narragansett and Wampanoag territory at Brown University. During
this panel, Lorén Spears (Narragansett/Niantic), Nitana Hicks
Greendeer (Mashpee Wampanoag), Niyo Moraza-Keeswood (Diné
and Chichimeca), Ruth Miller (Dena’ina Athabascan), and Raelee
Fourkiller (Cherokee) all spoke about how to center land and its
people beyond the process of rote acknowledgement. What struck
me most during this conversation was the speci"city with which
each person spoke to their relationship to place; to particular shorelines
and horizons; to particular plants and their tastes and smells.
As I drove down to Mattabesett (Middletown) in Wangunk territory
the next day to give my own talk about pedagogy and land acknowledgement,
I thought about how the people on the panel, who
came from a variety of tribal and national locations but were drawn
together by the fact that we all had some relationship to the institution
at which the event was held, emphasized the persistence of their
forms of acknowledgement. From describing joy at "nding wild
onions on campus to talking about recognizing the contours of the
land during a daily commute, all methods of acknowledgement were
rooted in a relationship to place that had to be developed through
consistent, concerted engagement.
!is is what I understand Simpson to mean when she talks about
“land as pedagogy.” It works against the type of acknowledgement
and subsequent disinvestment from responsibility that characterized
the discussion about ‘war paint’ with which I began this piece.
I want us, as anarchists, to be able to develop a pedagogy that not
only acknowledges the history of settlement, but also foregrounds
our continued responsibilities to the land and its people—not just
because there were promises made on behalf of many of us by settler
institutions that we are obliged to uphold, but because this is the
literal foundation of the work that we do.
65
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Each place where I have resided and learned, I’ve sought an example
of pedagogy that lives with the people of that place as a way to orient
me to my responsibilities. For example, while living on Narragansett
and Wampanoag territory, I considered Narragansett elder Dawn
Dove’s essay, “In Order to Understand !anksgiving, One Must
Understand the Sacredness of the Gi$.” Rather than reject the narrative
of !anksgiving itself, a story whose repetition remains a central
myth whereby the U.S. justi"es its claims over Native territory, she
reminds us that !anksgiving is an Indigenous ceremony that signals
relationship to the land. In the narrative of giving that characterizes
Wampanoag and settler exchange during the First !anksgiving,
Dove locates the promise and responsibility of reciprocity — a promise
and responsibility that settlers have consistently betrayed.
As she notes, the Wampanoag men whose interaction with the Pilgrims
has become the basis for the story of the First !anksgiving,
were “o#ering [a] sacred gi$…the gi$ of Friendship, Respect, Equality,
and Justice, the gi$ that would have made this country truly a
land in which there was freedom and justice for all. Unfortunately,
the gi$ was refused because of greed and racism.”35 What Dove
describes is a pedagogy, a method of engagement, a way of relating
that emanates from the land and lives with its people. As anarchists
doing work on land that is claimed by the U.S. settler state, we must
not only recognize that these pedagogies exist but allow them to
transform the work we do. In this way, we need to be attentive to the
speci"city of the place where we do our work since, by virtue of our
presence, we are imbricated in these relations.
As anarchists, we must recognize that any to attempt to confront the
U.S. state without addressing settlement is not to confront the U.S.
state at all. In fact, neglect to do so reinforces some of the very foundational
claims to sovereignty upon which the U.S. state depends.
But what if, as anarchists, we adopted a pedagogy that recognized, as
Dove puts it, the sacredness of the gi$? How might our movements
be transformed if we took seriously a method of engagement that
centered place? One that recognized that not only are other worlds
possible, but that there are other worlds here — other worlds that
live with the land and for which we already have models for relation,
if only we would honor them.
66
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Notes
1 “Police Snatch and Arrest 18 at Anti-Capitalist March,” Rochester Indymedia, 21
July 2012, http://rochester.indymedia.org/node/53497
2 !ese quotes are taken from personal screenshots of the conversation.
3 “Warpaint Rides in Chiefs’ Superbowl Victory Celebration” (video), KMBC Kansas
City, February 5, 2020:https://www.msn.com/en-us/weather/video/warpaintrides-
in-chiefs-super-bowl-victory-celebration/vp-BBZGCyF
4 Nino Munoz, “Warpaint” in "e Last Magazine, January 21, 2014, https://thelastmagazine.
com/warpaint/
5 For more on the gendered dimensions of these tropes, see Rayna Green’s “!e
Pocahontas Perplex: !e Image of Indian Women in American Culture,” "e
Massachusetts Review 16:4 (1975): 698-714 and Scott Morgensen’s “Cutting to the
Roots of Colonial Masculinity” in Indigenous Men and Masculinities: Legacies,
Identity, Regeneration, ed. Robert Alexander Innes and Kim Anderson (Winnipeg:
University of Manitoba Press, 2015).
6 David Graeber, Possibilities: Essays on Hierarchy, Rebellion, and Desire (Oakland:
AK Press, 2007): 304.
7 Paolo Freire, Pedagogy of the Oppressed (New York: Bloomsbury, 2000).
8 See Lila Asher, Joe Curnow, and Amil Davis, “!e limits of settlers’ territorial
acknowledgements” in Curriculum Inquiry, 48:3 (2018): 315-334.
9 For mainstream examples, see Amanda Coletta, “Canada pays tribute to Indigenous
people before hockey games, school days. Some complain it rings
hollow,” "e Washington Post, July 17, 2019 https://www.washingtonpost.com/
world/the_americas/canadas-land-acknowledgments-draw-criticism--from-the-
Indigenous-peoples-theyre-supposed-to-honor/2019/07/25/8479ab14-accd-11e9-
9411-a608f9d0c2d3_story.html; for an example in the anarchist context, see the
announcement for the 2018 Seattle Anarchist Book Fair, which reads: “!e tenth
annual book fair held on occupied Duwamish land will be a two-day thrill ride on
Saturday and Sunday, November 17th and 18th, from 10 AM - 5 PM at the Vera
Project.” Anonymous Contributor, “Announcing the Seattle Anarchist Bookfair
2018,” It’s Going Down, September 11, 2018, https://itsgoingdown.org/announcingthe-
seattle-anarchist-bookfair-2018/
10 Eve Tuck and K. Wayne Yang, “Decolonization is Not a Metaphor” in Decolonization:
Indigeneity, Education, and Society 1:1 (2012): 1-40.
11 !is echoes the arguments that Athabascan scholar Dian Million has made
regarding reconciliation and that Yellowknives Dene scholar Glen Coulthard has
made about recognition, both in the Canadian context. See Dian Million, "erapeutic
Nations: Healing in an Age of Indigenous Human Rights (Tucson: University
of Arizona Press, 2013) and Glen Sean Coulthard, Red Skin, White Masks: Rejecting
the Colonial Politics of Recognition (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 2014).
12 See “About” on CBC’s Unreserved website: https://www.cbc.ca/radio/unreserved/
about-unreserved-1.4349977
13 CBC Radio, “ I regret it; Hayden King on writing Ryerson’s territorial acknowledgement,”
Unreserved, January 18, 2020: https://www.cbc.ca/radio/unreserved/
67
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
redrawing-the-lines-1.4973363/i-regret-it-hayden-king-on-writing-ryerson-university-
s-territorial-acknowledgement-1.4973371
14 Chelsea Vowel, “Beyond territorial acknowledgements,” âpihtawikosisân,
September 23, 2016: https://apihtawikosisan.com/2016/09/beyond-territorialacknowledgments/
15 David Graeber, “!e New Anarchists,” "e New Le$ Review 13 (Jan-Feb 2002):
61-73; Staughton Lynd and Andrej Grubacic Wobblies and Zapatistas: Conversations
on Anarchism, Marxism, and Radical History (Oakland, PM Press: 2008);
Andrej Grubacic and David Graeber, “Anarchism, or the Revolutionary Movement
of the Twenty-First Century,” Z-Net, January 6th 2004, https://theanarchistlibrary.
org/library/andrej-grubacic-david-graeber-anarchism-or-the-revolutionary-movement-
of-the-twenty-"rst-century;
16 As May has argued, “!e collapse of communism in Eastern Europe and the Soviet
Union has reshaped the terrain so that the foundation of existence upon which
was built much of the vision of what could be has also collapsed. !is is the meaning
of the slogan that Marxism is dead.” See also Richard Day’s Gramsci is Dead;
Barbara Epstein, “Anarchism and the Anti-Globalization Movement,” "e Monthly
Review, (September 1, 2001): https://monthlyreview.org/2001/09/01/anarchismand-
the-anti-globalization-movement/
17 For a more comprehensive discussion of this history, see David Graeber, Direct
Action: An Ethnography (Oakland: AK Press, 2009).
18 See Naomi Klein, "e Shock Doctrine: "e Rise of Disaster Capitalism (New York:
Picador, 2008); Edward S. Herman and Noam Chomsky, Manufacturing Consent:
"e Political Economy of the Mass Media (New York: Pantheon, 2002); and Joseph
Stiglitz, Globalization and its Discontents (New York: W.W. & Norton, 1994).
19 Amy Kaplan, "e Anarchy of Empire in the Making of U.S. Culture (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 2005).
20 Alexis Shotwell, Against Purity: Living Ethically in Compromised Times (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 2016): 4.
21 Ernestine Hayes, “Contemporary Creative Writing and Ancient Oral Tradition”
in Shapes of Native Non!ction: Collected Essays by Contemporary Writers ed. Elissa
Washuta and !eresa Warburton (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2019):
27.
22 Sam Howe Verhovek, “For Seattle, Triumph and Protest,” New York Times, October
13 1999: https://www.nytimes.com/1999/10/13/us/for-seattle-triumph-andprotest.
html
23 For more on Seattle’s history, see Coll !rush’s Native Seattle: Histories from
the Crossing-Over Place (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2008); for more
on the construction of the transcontinental railroad, see Manu Karuka, Empire’s
Tracks: Indigenous Nations, Chinese Workers, and the Transcontinental Railroad
(Oakland: University of California Press, 2019); for more on the Alaska Yukon Paci
"c Expedition, see Shari M. Huhndorf, Mapping the Americas: "e Transnational
Politics of Contemporary Native Culture (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2009).
24 Verhovek, “For Seattle.”
25 Robbins’ acceptance speech was reproduced in print for the "rst time in 2006.
68
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
Tom Robbins, “Here in Geoduck Junction,” Seattle Weekly, October 9, 2006: http://
archive.seattleweekly.com/2000-05-03/news/here-in-geoduck-junction/
26 I am thankful to Zoltán Grossman for challenging me to think through this interplay
between the Battle in Seattle and the Makah whaling controversy, which is
informed by his work on Native and non-Native alliances during the Fish Wars in
both Washington and Wisconsin. See Zoltán Grossman, Unlikely Alliances: Native
Nations and White Communities Join to Defend Rural Lands (Seattle: University of
Washington Press, 2017).
27 Zoltán Grossman, Unlikely Alliances; Joshua L. Reid, "e Sea is My Country:
"e Maritime World of the Makahs (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2015).
Opponents like House of Representatives Republican Jack Metcalf (Washington
State, Second District) and Sea Shepard’s Paul Watson were joined by journalists
like Richard Blow (writing for Mother Jones) in demonstrating an extreme lack of
knowledge not only about the issue at hand, but about the history of treaties in
Washington in general. Metcalf repeatedly depended on claims that the right to
whale is a ‘special right’ granted to the Makah by the United States government,
rather than a right secured and reserved by the Makah during the signing of the
treaty. Joining Metcalf ’s project of preventing Makah peoples from exercising
their treaty rights, Watson consistently decried the hunts by positioning himself
as the arbiter of traditionalism, pointing over and over to Makah whalers’ use
of contemporary tools as evidence that the whale hunt had no relationship to
maintaining traditional cultural practices. And in his article “!e Great American
Whale Hunt,” Blow describes the broader political issues at hand: “Challenging
the whaling moratorium, and the [National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration]
would ignite international fury, not to mention the wrath of domestic
environmental groups. But contest the Makah’s treaty, and it would risk a political
"restorm from all American Indians, all of whom live under similar treaties with
the federal government.” Of course, not all Native peoples in the U.S. live under
treaties with the federal government. But what is more, Blow (much like Metcalf)
misunderstands the fundamental character of treaties themselves. Because
the U.S. government signed the treaty with the Makah that reserved their rights
to traditional whaling practices and grounds in 1855, it had no authority to give
away those rights when it participated in either the International Convention
for the Regulation of Whaling (ICRW) in 1946 or agreed to the moratorium on
whaling through the IWC in 1982. As a sovereign nation, the Makah petitioned
the IWC themselves, willfully participating in an international conversation that
demonstrated their ongoing commitment to a balance between conservation and
traditional whaling practices — something central to Makah whaling practices
since time immemorial.
28 Janet !omas, "e Battle in Seattle: "e Story Behind the WTO Demonstrations
(New York: Fulcrum Publishing, 2000): 20. Graeber has mentioned White’s turtles
as a notable example of the use of puppetry in mass protests. Graeber, Direct Action:
An Ethnography (Oakland: AK Press, 2009): 491; Marc Cooper of the Los
Angeles Times noted White’s turtles as a de"nitive image of the protests as well.
Marc Cooper, “Teamsters and Turtles: !ey’re Together at Last,” Los Angeles Times,
69
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
December 2nd 1999: http://articles.latimes.com/1999/dec/02/local/me-39707
29 Associated Press, “Protestors leave, but what hunt is still planned: Makah tribes
is considering alternatives,” Deseret News, December 1st 1998: https://www.
deseretnews.com/article/666150/Protesters-leave-but-whale-hunt-is-still-planned.
html; Jim Nollman, “Whaling Report to the Makah Tribal Council,” Interspecies
Newsletter, 1999, https://www.whaleweb.org/intersp/pages/makah.html
30 Christopher Dunagan, “Hunters become the hunted,” Kitsap Sun, October 5,
1998: http://web.kitsapsun.com/archive/1998/10-05/0056_hunters_become_the_
hunted.html
31 For instance, see David Graeber’s Direct Action: An Ethnography (Oakland: AK
Press, 2009), Richard J.F. Day’s Gramsci is Dead: Anarchist Currents in the Newest
Social Movements (New York: Pluto Press, 2005), and Staughton Lynd and Andrej
Grubacic’s Wobblies and Zapatistas: Conversations on Anarchism, Marxism, and
Radical History (Oakland: PM Press, 2008), all of which are invaluable texts in
the study of the rise of New Anarchism. Each focuses, in some part, not only on
the protests in Seattle, but on questions of Indigenous uprising more generally.
However, none consider the local Indigenous context of what happened in Seattle
as part of the narrative of those protests and their importance to the rise of New
Anarchism in the United States at the turn of the 21st century.
32 Both the Treaty of Neah Bay, signed with Makahs, and the Treaty of Point Elliott,
signed by representatives from across the Native nations of the Salish Sea region,
including Duwamish leader Chief Seattle, contained articles that explicitly prevented
tribes from trading “at Vancouver’s Island or elsewhere out of the dominions
of the United States.” According to Reid, this was Steven’s attempt to “control
Indian trade, redirecting it to bene"t the U.S. rather than British interests,” and to
dislocate important kinship connections between Native nations newly divided by
the 49th parallel (Reid, 133).
33 Adam J. Barker, “Already Occupied: Indigenous peoples, settler colonialism,
and the Occupy movements in North America,” Social Movement Studies 11, no.
3-4 (August 9th 2012): 327-334; Adam J. Barker, “!e Contemporary Reality of
Canadian Imperialism: Settler Colonialism and the Hybrid Colonial State,” American
Indian Quarterly 33, no. 3 (Summer 2009): 325-351; Adam J. Barker, “From
Adversaries to Allies: Forging respectful alliances between Indigenous and Settler
Peoples” in Alliances: Re/Envisioning Indigenous non-Indigenous Relationships,
ed. Lynne Davis (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010): 316-333. See also
Adam J. Barker and Jenny Pickerill, “Radicalizing Relationships To and !rough
Shared Geographies: Why Anarchists Need to Understand Indigenous Connections
to Land, Sea, and Place,” Antipode 44, no. 5 (August 17th 2012): 1705-1275
and Adam J. Barker and Emma Battell Lowman, Settler: Identity and Colonialism
in 21st Century Canada (Halifax: Fernwood Press, 2015). Craig Fortier, Unsettling
the Commons: Social Movements Within, Against, and Beyond Settler Colonialism
(Winnipeg: Arbiter Ring Publishing, 2017); Nick Montgomery and carla bergman,
Joyful Militancy: Building "riving Resistance in Toxic Times (Oakland: AK Press,
2017): 73.
34 A#nities: "eory, Culture, Action, August 31st 2011,
70
Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies, 2021.1
https://ojs.library.queensu.ca/index.php/a%nities/issue/view/572
35 Dawn Dove, “In Order to Understand !anksgiving, One Must Understand the
Sacredness of the Gi$,” Dawnland Voices: An Anthology of Indigenous Writing from
New England, ed. Siobhan Senier (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2014):
484.

The Politics of Indigeneity, Anarchist Praxis, and Decolonization 
J. Khaulani Kauanui* 
At the time of this writing, the global COVID-19 pandemic has dev­astated the most vulnerable worldwide, while also revealing the chal­lenges of governments and the range of approaches to responding to the crisis. For example, there have been stark contrasts between the ways in which the states of New Zealand, Japan, and Taiwan have managed to contain the spread of this novel coronavirus, unlike Eng­land, Brazil, and the United States. 
In the U.S., the tensions between federal authority and that of state and local authorities has meant a piecemeal approach to handling public health matters. e mass suering of countless people has exposed the settler colonial and racialized violence and socio-eco­nomic disparities that existed long prior to the outbreak. e Trump administration’s gross mishandling of the pandemic: the lack of a coordinated response, combined denial, and downplaying of the virus’s lethality – fueled by conspiracy theories that it is a hoax – has compounded the misery.  And, as many have noted, Trump is not an aberration, but a manifestation of the American ethos more gener­ally – the product of settler colonial genocide of Indigenous peoples and enslavement of Africans – still unfolding through the ongoing 
*J. Khaulani Kauanui is Professor of American Studies and a liate faculty in Anthropology at Wesleyan University, where she teaches courses on indigenous studies, critical race studies, settler colonial studies, and anarchist studies. She is the author of Hawaiian Blood: Colonialism and the Politics of Sovereignty and Indigeneity (Duke University Press 2008) and Paradoxes of Hawaiian Sovereignty: Land, Sex, and the Colonial Politics of State Nationalism (Duke University Press 2018). She is also the editor of Speaking of Indigenous Politics: Conversations with Activists, Scholars, and Tribal Leaders (University of Minnesota Press 2018). Kau­anui is one of the six co-founders of the Native American and Indigenous Studies Association (NAISA), established in 2008. She serves on the advisory board for the 
U.S.
 Campaign for the Academic and Cultural Boycott of Israel and is currently completing a book provisionally titled “Indigenous Implications: Decolonizing 

U.S.
 Palestine Solidarity Activism.” 


territorial dispossession and attempted elimination of Indigenous peoples and the perpetual devaluation of Black lives through the “af­terlife of slavery,” - “skewed life chances, limited access to health and education, premature death, incarceration, and impoverishment.”1 
% 
Some theorize that the process of European settlement leading to the founding of the U.S. oers insights into the U.S. government – in all its manifestations, besides the Executive O ce – and its fragmented response to the pandemic. For example, David Stasavage suggests that it is “a product of the way our country was rst settled by Euro­peans, oen in small communities amidst a vast wilderness where strong central control, either from England or from capitals of the colonies, simply wasn't feasible.”2 He continues, asserting that this “helped pave the way not only for an American tradition of rugged individualism but also for an early form of democracy – for free White males – based on local control with a weak center.” Curiously, Stasavage also compares this form of decentralized governance to Indigenous modes prior to colonization. “ ere was nothing unique or miraculous about the pattern of early democracy in America,” he writes. “Prior to European conquest, Native American societies in the woodlands of eastern North America had organized themselves along exactly the same lines…”3 His attempt to gra a settler colonial development onto pre-colonial Indigenous lifeways is a common discursive practice taken up by white Americans in their attempt to indigenize themselves.  And it is these sorts of false equivalen­cies that tend to be marshalled as a justication for libertarianism, as though it is part of an Indigenous lineage. However, there is an important ip side to the abdication of the federal government’s refusal to coordinate any meaningful response to the COVID-19 crisis: many communities – including Indigenous ones – are urgently responding with forms of care that articulate to anarchist praxis, es­pecially that of mutual aid. at is, survival work practiced alongside social movement demands for transformative change.4 
Indigenous peoples have been hit particularly hard by the global pandemic, with the Navajo Nation – among (too) many others – suf­fering exorbitantly.5 As early as May 2020, Navajo Nation surpassed the U.S. states of New York and New Jersey for the highest Co­vid-19 infection rate per capita.6  In October 2020, the proportional death toll from COVID-19 at Navajo Nation was higher than any 
U.S. state.7  In early December 2020, amid the second wave of the pandemic, Navajo o cials recorded a record-high seven-day aver­age of new infections.8  And by late January 2021, the death toll at Navajo Nation hit over 1,000 deaths.9 is dire situation is related to structural forces rooted in colonialism. As media reports have highlighted, on the vast reservation (over 27,413 miles), hospi­tals and medical centers are few and far between, “along with high unemployment, poverty, and approximately one third of the popula­tion living without electricity or running water.”10 Moreover, 38% of people live below the poverty line, according to numbers from the 2010 U.S. Census, which is more than double the U.S. poverty rate of 15.1%.11 
Diné (Navajo) individuals responded throughout, taking matters into their own hands aer speculation of tribal government corrup­tion with the way donations were being distributed (or not).12 In Window Rock, Arizona, which is the location of the Navajo Nation government, Diné a liated with the K’é Infoshop organized and have been continuously supplying elders, families, and the immu­nocompromised with food and medical provisions.13 As detailed by Cecelia Nowell, “In the Navajo Nation, Anarchism Has Indig­enous Roots,” co-founders Brandon Benallie (Navajo and Hopi) and Radmilla Cody (Navajo and Black) began by setting up a tent outside of the Navajo Nation Museum and eventually moved to a permanent space.14 Challenging the coercive extractive projects such as the Black Mesa coal mines and uranium mining on Navajo land, wrought by centuries of U.S. colonialism, the co-founders are liing up traditional Diné principles in their organizing, which they note resonate with anarchist praxis. 
On the one hand, Diné communities are engaged in anarchist practices from which settler anarchists could learn even as, on the other, one reason that they come so easily is precisely the fact that non-hierarchical systems of mutual care are already long-established modes of respectful relation in this community (and in many other Indigenous contexts). e name of the collective – K’é – refers to the Diné kinship system, Bahe (Navajo) explains, and it also refers to an overarching philosophy about the interconnectivity of the entire uni­verse, “these relationships that we have with one another and with the elements that exist in the world, whether that be the weather or the water or the animals.”15 And, Benallie notes, “because we never had chiefs; we didn’t have a hierarchy. It was always horizontal.”16 
ose with K’é Infoshop also draw connections between how hard the pandemic hit the Navajo and continuous colonial domination, lack of running water and infrastructure, and a di cult history of economic viability, given U.S. policies intended to pulverize the trib­al nation. Benallie suggests that Diné kinship began to break down as the tribe tried to negotiate with the U.S. government, guided by business interests that facilitated the signing of oil, gas, and coal leases in the early twentieth century. e extractive nature of the po­litical economy has also made for complicated issues between tribal government and Navajo citizens.17 In a sense, the ways in which ex­ternal forces restructured Diné society now resemble broader social conditions for settler society as well, even as Indigenous communi­ties are themselves disproportionately aected by pandemic condi­tions as well. is historical legacy and the contemporary dynamics at play are why Diné anarchists like Benallie, Cody, and Bahe moved to organize their own eorts for pandemic relief – working outside of both tribal and federal government initiatives (or lack thereof) – which include a community food pantry, broad-based food distribu­tion, and weekly solidarity meals with unsheltered community mem­bers. ey also connect with related mutual aid projects, including the youth-led Navajo & Hopi Families COVID-19 Relief project.18 
e Navajo case highlights the ways in which practices of Indigenous renewal reverberate with anarchist praxis, all while resisting ongoing settler colonial domination – and in the context of the pandemic, no less. 
is special issue of Anarchist Developments in Cultural Studies fea­tures enduring indigeneity and its challenges to U.S., Canadian, and Bolivian settler colonialism in critical conversation with anarchist politics, showing how settler anarchist practice has a lot to learn from Indigenous anarchist praxis. ese conversations are oen con­tentious. For example, while at a 2015 anarchist conference at Haver­ford College, some audience members audibly balked as I oered a land acknowledgement prior to my presentation. I later learned that these loud obnoxious sighs did not reect assertions that recognition of the place where we were in session – the homeland of the Lenape people – was relatively meaningless in comparison to “land back” initiatives (#landback). Far from it: the interruptions seemed to be knee-jerk reactions to any reference to what could be construed as territorial claims. In another example, at an anarchist studies con­ference on exile and enclosure held at Cornell University in 2016, a scholar tried to challenge my use of the term “stolen lands” to describe settler colonial expropriation of Indigenous territory – sug­gesting the term “stolen” was a misnomer since Indigenous peoples never owned the land in the rst place. I pointed out that while Indigenous peoples may have never claimed possession in a Lockean sense, settler projects of land expropriation are not only forms of the, they are genocidal. From there, the dialogue rapidly devolved into the person who challenged me insisting that “everyone is Indig­enous to somewhere,” thus attempting to render indigeneity mean­ingless as a social category. 
As crucial context for the discussion of the distinctions between settler anarchist and Indigenous anarchist politics, I’ll oer some working denitions of the concept of “indigeneity” and the analytic of “settler colonialism.” I will then discuss competing notions of In­digenous sovereignty to ground an examination of how (non-Indig­enous) anarchist activism in settler colonial contexts too oen falls prey to the reproduction of settler colonial logics and practices (ma­terial and discursive), which in turn makes for tensions in solidarity work between (non-Indigenous) anarchist activists and Indigenous communities. Finally, I’ll examine a few examples of Indigenous an­archist praxis, to show how they challenge settler colonialism at the root. My introduction closes with brief summaries of the line-up of articles in this special issue – all of which feature Indigenous activ­ism that counters or otherwise contests settler colonial state power and statist forms of governance more generally. 
Indigeneity and Settler Colonialism 
Settler colonialism is a structure of domination that endures indige­neity, even as it holds out against it.  is fact is important for think­ing through decolonial anarchism and Indigenous sovereignty. e terms “Indigenous” and “indigeneity” – in relation to people(s) – emerge from colonial history and the settler colonial present, aswell as critical responses to these social forces. Some may dismiss asser­tions of Indigenous identity as essentialist, assuming that claims to “indigeneity” are necessarily grounded in a belief in an underlying and unchanging ‘essence.’ But for Indigenous peoples, indigeneity is rooted in a distinct relationship to land, not merely being born in a particular place. e Oxford English Dictionary traces the etymology of the adjective “indigenous” to late Latin: indigen-us, meaning born in a country, native (<indigen-a a native), and denes the term as “born or produced naturally in a land or region; native or belonging naturally to (the soil, region, etc.),” as well as “inborn, innate, native”, and “of, relating to, or intended for the native inhabitants.”19 at denition takes the geography of a country for granted. Yet, it can be reductive to use the term to refer to anyone born in a particular place.  is emphasis on nativity or birth oen leads to the assertion, such as the example mentioned above, that ‘everyone is Indigenous to some place,’ as if people are mobile ora or fauna.  is common universalizing, whether intentional or not, can end up erasing the political history of specic Indigenous struggles over land claims.  Moreover, it cannot account for the wide range of relations to region and nation on the part of the more than 476 million Indigenous people spread across 90 countries worldwide.20 
Outside of Native American and Indigenous Studies, a range of academic elds and disciplines – including cultural studies– have privileged the framework of postcolonialism over settler colonial­ism. Importantly, postcolonial studies as a eld is a critical response to the legacies of franchise colonialism and imperialism, one that oers sustained criticism concerning unnished nationalist libera­tion movements in the Global South (formerly known as the ird World). Nonetheless, it cannot aptly be applied to the still colonized “Fourth World.”21 Coined in 1974 by George Manuel (Shuswap), the “Fourth World” names the “Indigenous peoples descended from a country’s aboriginal population and who today are completely or partly deprived of the right to their own territories and its riches.”22 
is deprivation of Indigenous access to ancestral territories is the hallmark of settler colonial dispossession. 
By denition, Indigenous challenges to the state always already entail confronting settler colonial domination. For example, contempo­rary U.S. federal laws that govern Indigenous peoples continue to be grounded in the doctrine of discovery, which is rooted in 15th century Papal bulls. e 1493 edict by the Pope established Christian dominion and subjugated non-Christian peoples by invalidating aboriginal land tenure in favor of the government whose subjects explored and occupied a territory whose inhabitants were not sub­jects of a European Christian monarch.23 U.S. federal Indian law and policy have long been premised on Old Testament narratives of the “chosen people” and the “Promised land,” as exemplied in the 1823 Supreme Court ruling Johnson v. McIntosh, a landmark decision that held that private citizens could not purchase lands from Indian tribes. e foundations of the court’s opinion lay in the “discovery doctrine.” Based on this ruling, the U.S. government considers tribal nations mere ‘occupants’ of their traditional homelands with collec­tive “use rights” based on the court’s invention of the concept of “ab­original title.”24 But it is not just the U.S. government that maintains this legal ction; all Euro-settler nations continue to use the doctrine to rationalize the conquest of Indigenous lands.25 
In terms of settler colonialism as a social formation and analytic, here I draw on the work of Patrick Wolfe, who theorizes the concept as a model of domination that operates by “the logic of elimination of the native” because land acquisition is its central feature.26  Draw­ing on the structural comparisons between the U.S., Australia, and Israel-Palestine, he dierentiates settler colonialism from other forms of colonial processes such as franchise colonialism (e.g. the dierence between Britain in North America and Britain in India).27 As Wolfe argues, “Settler colonies were (are) premised on the elimi­nation of native societies. e split tensing reects a determinate feature of settler colonization. e colonizers come to stay — inva­sion is a structure, not an event.” He notes “elimination refers to more than the summary liquidation of Indigenous peoples, though it includes that.” As Wolfe explains, because settler colonialism “destroys to replace” it is “inherently eliminatory but not invariably genocidal.”28 Hence, he suggests that “structural genocide” avoids the question of degree and enables an understanding of the relationships between spatial removal (e.g., the “Trail of Tears,” which was a series of forced relocations by the U.S. government of Southeastern tribes between 1830 and 1850); mass killings (e.g., the 1890 Wounded Knee Massacre, when the U.S. army killed nearly 300 Lakota); and coercive forms of biocultural assimilation (boarding schools, ban­ning Indigenous languages, etc.).29 In other words, elimination may entail violent exterminatory campaigns, but there are others ways to ‘eliminate the native’. 
Wolfe further explains that settler colonialism is a structure due to its “complex social formation and as continuity through time,” meaning it is durable. Importantly, though, Wolfe does not claim that settler colonialism is “permanent”; rather, he shows how those who impose, create, and remake settler colonial societies make a bid for perma­nency. As I have written elsewhere, indigeneity itself is enduring; the operative logic of settler colonialism may be to “eliminate the native,” but Indigenous people and peoples exist, resist, and persist.30 
Settler colonial domination and Indigenous endurance can also be found throughout regions governed by states that were once Span­ish colonies.31 Shannon Speed (Chickasaw) has argued that Latin American states are also settler colonial states, that colonialism did not end with the former Spanish colonies declaring independence.32 She suggests that some Latin Americanists have not taken up the analytic of settler colonialism because of the ways in which Wolfe’s theory makes a rm distinction between land and labor (in relation to Native genocide and Black slavery, in the case of the U.S.). And with regard to the “logic of elimination of the native,” Speed further explains that while some scholars have suggested that the distinction between the Anglophone and Hispanophone colonial processes in the Americas has been the assertion that because of racial mixing, Latin America was not characterized by white settlement.33 However, as she importantly points out, the argument that “in Latin America racial mixing led to a mixed-race population of Indigenous and Spaniard and that therefore colonizer and Native are genetically en­twined and there is no racial separation of the two” is problematic.34 She argues that the racial ideology of mestizaje advanced by criollo elites relied on a logic of elimination as they sought to consolidate “national identity in newly ‘independent’ states characterized by the presence of large and diverse populations who did not identify with the national polity…and who had been dispossessed of their lands.”35 

Indigenous Sovereignty 
In an anarchist political milieu, with regard to Indigenous peoples and politics, there are oen tensions over the concepts of people-hood, sovereignty, nationalism and territorial governance. For example, the concept of Indigenous nationhood – common in rela­tion to the U.S. and Canadian nation-states – is too oen a sticking point for anarchists who may bristle over abidance to any notion of distinct peoplehood and nd the language of Indigenous autonomy 
– more common in Latin American contexts as an expression of self-determination – more acceptable.36 Yet for Indigenous peoples the assertion of nationhood is about survival as peoples, given the endur­ance of colonial domination, rather than a bid for state power (or as a form of separatism, patriotism, and xenophobia). Too oen, non-Indigenous understandings of Indigenous sovereignty claims de­nounce them as retrograde ethnic nationalisms or dismiss assertions of indigeneity as a problematic form of identity politics. is fraught terrain begs for decolonial anarchist approaches that challenge set­tler colonialism in the quest to confront capitalism and statism. 
Yet, it is the question of sovereignty perhaps more than any other dierence that is a barrier for non-Native anarchists seeking to work more closely with Indigenous activists. Anarchists may take exception to insistence on Indigenous sovereignty, but the points of contention are oen confused. Anarchists (who are non-Indigenous) may understand “sovereignty” as always already a form of domina­tion through a state monopoly on the use of violence against its citi­zens. But Indigenous governance derived from Westphalian models is not necessarily what Indigenous individuals are referring to when they articulate the concept of sovereignty in settler colonial contexts. Rather, they are oen referring to their collective inherent authority to govern and assert their self-determination as polities. 
Given its colonial history and baggage, “sovereignty” is undoubtedly a highly contested term, one debated within Indigenous communi­ties as well as the broad eld of Native American and Indigenous studies.37 Some regard sovereignty as an irredeemably Western concept that is always already tied to statist forms of governance. Taiaiake Alfred (Kahnawake Mohawk) – who advances what he terms “anarcho-indigenism” – for example, insists that relying on the concept of sovereignty is a concession to state models.38  He points to the models of self-governance aorded to Indigenous peoples in both U.S. and Canadian policy, urging instead on the need for the decolonization of Indigenous thinking about governance. And yet, that is precisely what many Indigenous people(s) mean by “sover­eignty” in the rst place – a point that demands an understanding of the contrast. Moreover, it should be noted that this form of settler colonial recognition and exercise of tribal sovereignty has been im­portant for Native Nations to prevent further erosion of the limited land bases settler colonial governments have relegated Indigenous peoples to; o-reservation treaty access for hunting, shing, gather­ing, and ceremonial rights; as well as cultural practices tied to spe­cic places (e.g., sacred sites). 
Speaking to the broader hemispheric context, it should be noted that Indigenous peoples’ struggles with Latin American settler colonial states are not typically articulated through the framework of sov­ereignty. Rather, the language of autonomy, autogestión (self-man­agement) and other forms of mobilization that de-center the state are most oen utilized. Alejandra Gaitán-Barrera & Govand Khalid Azeez explain that the initial wave of Indigenous mobilization in Latin America in the 1970s and 1980s was driven by the framework of a “politics of recognition” – including its language of “rights” and self-governance without statist arrangements.  But movements in the region today have since shied to modes of what they term “revindicative autonomism” to reclaim a precolonial “sovereignty” of sorts.39 ey point to the case study of Coordinadora Arauco Mal­leco, a major player in the “New Arauco War” in south-central Chile set on the complete recovery and reconstruction of Wallmapu (the ancestral territory of the Mapuche people and nation, located in southern Chile and Argentina).40 In another example, Gaitán-Barre­ra and Azeez examine the Council of Miskitu Elders of the Commu­nitarian Nation Mosquitia in Nicaragua, which has been described as “the epitome of denominated revindicative autonomism.”41 e movement focuses on its territorial component while rejecting the Western nation-state model of governance. 
Of course, some forms of Indigenous government can also be read as inherently hierarchical. is reality may cause tensions between anarchist values such as reciprocity, respect, dialogism and exibility of authority: these may exist simultaneously with seemingly ossied forms of domination and class oppression. However, in countless In­digenous contexts, these forms of governance are structured in ways meant to be consistently re-invigorated, negotiated, and challenged through ceremony – rather than as the static modes of hierarchy oen wrought by colonial interventions.42 
In their delineation of connections and encounters between anar­chist and Indigenous thought Kahala Johnson (Kanaka Maoli) and Kathy E. Ferguson focus on the themes of temporality, states, law, and sovereignty. ey discuss how (non-Indigenous) anarchists typically resist the language of sovereignty, “seeing it as irrevocably married to hierarchies and states.”43 us, such anarchists may nd it alarming when Indigenous activists claim sovereignty for their com­munities. However, as they point out, anarchists address elements of sovereignty when dealing with questions of authority, decision making, and identity – while considering sovereignty as a formation or approach that protects the authority of states, owners of property, and patriarchy.44 In turn, Johnson and Ferguson suggest that encoun­ters with Indigenous struggles for sovereignty can enable anarchists to “rethink sovereignty as a plural and contested set of possibilities rather than always and only an alibi for the state.”45  Moreover, they identify some of the ways in which approaches to liberatory life ways resonate between the two, especially with regard to an emphasis on autonomous communities, integral living, and pregurative poli­tics. Johnson and Ferguson take care in bringing the two together in relational terms: “Our aim is not to reduce Indigenous sovereignty to anarchist communities, nor to ‘indigenise’ anarchism to defend it in decolonisation struggles. More modestly, we are exploring points of contact in which meaningful and contentious conversations could emerge through the development of resonant relationships.”46  Keep­ing these distinctions in mind, I suggest that anarchist projects in settler colonial contexts that claim (or aim) to be decolonial neces­sarily entail engaging with Indigenous sovereignty. 

Challenging Settler Colonial Anarchism 
Perhaps not coincidentally, the majority of the few scholarly works bringing anarchist and Indigenous activism into conversation focus on the oen fraught (or otherwise complicated) nature of solidarity politics across social dierences between (non-Indigenous) anar­chists and Indigenous activists.47 Adam J. Barker and Jenny Pick­erill examine how many anarchists have faced di culties engaging in Indigenous solidarity “through unintentional (oen unwitting) transgressions and appropriations.”48 ey suggest that Indigenous activists and “anarchist Settler people” struggle to nd common ground, but that settler colonial relations make for a complicated power dynamic. In turn, they suggest that deeper understandings by non-Indigenous anarchists of Indigenous peoples’ theories and articulations of place-based relationships are critical to approaching solidarity work “in place and with respect.”49 e challenge, then, is how to engage in radical political work without reproducing settler colonial logics and practices. 
A prime example of an anarchist political initiative that ended up reproducing settler colonial logics and practices can be found in the Occupy Wall Street (OWS) movement.50 Widely understood as an anarchist project, at least in origin, it was emblematic of how glo­balization can inuence activist developments across nation-state borders and entire geopolitical regions. Occupy further centered the call to “reclaim” the commons in demanding the return of that which was stolen through “the corrosive power of major banks and multinational corporations over the democratic process.”51 And, while many of the on-the-ground practices at various Occupy locales relied on non-binding consensus-based collective decisions and direct actions, the rallying was to “occupy” and “reclaim” with little to no recognition of the history of settler colonial land expropriation that gave rise to the corporate plutocracy of the 1%.  But what of a demographic that might be called ‘the other one-percent’ – Native Americans?  ose Indigenous to what is known as lower Manhattan include the Manahatin, Lenape, and Munsee peoples, according to their respective histories.52 
From the very start of OWS, Indigenous individuals pointed out how oensive the articulation of “occupy” claims were on two levels: to assert people “take back Wall Street” and “occupy” erased the actual legacy of colonial occupation of Indigenous peoples’ lands, and the fact that Wall Street itself is built on dispossession. In fact, as Joanne Barker (Lenape) delineates, in the mid-1600s, the Dutch built the wall that used to stand on the site of “Wall Street,” giving it its name.53 ey did so not only to keep out the English, but also to block Indigenous peoples from their own territory.54  In other words, the “Wall Street” that is a gloss for the global-nance industry55 arose from a history of the corporations formed during the early Dutch and English colonial periods consolidating Indigenous homelands as stolen property – dispossession furthered by U.S. settler colonialism that continued unabated. Activists who were part of OWS across the 
U.S. overwhelmingly treated the Indigenous critique of the use of the term “occupy” as though it was merely a bid for political correctness in response to some imperfect nomenclature.56 
Several scholar-activists have produced sustained critiques of OWS that have bearing for this discussion as well. Adam J. Barker inter­rogates tactical occupations, noting how “the concerns of Indigenous peoples remain unaddressed; legacies of historical colonization and the dynamics of contemporary settler colonialism are power­fully entrenched.” He contrasts how OWS, for example, sought to claim the spaces created by state power and corporate wealth, and spaces of urban poverty – whereas Indigenous occupations “seek to reclaim and reassert relationships to land and place submerged beneath the settler colonial world.”57 Moreover, “the nationalistic, racialized content of Occupy movements in North America does not just leave Indigenous peoples out; it situates Occupy within a settler colonial dynamic, participating in the transfer of land and power to the hands of the settler colonial majority.”58 is, then, begs the question, what makes it dierent from any other settler occupa­tion?  Sandy Grande also critically examines the movement and its elision of Indigenous peoples in the deployment of the discursive trope and strategy of “occupation” as its central organizing principle. As she argues, “OWS reconstitutes (territorial) appropriation as the democratic manifest and fails to propose something distinct from or counter to the settler state. In so doing, the movement dissolves co­lonialism into capitalism by courting a limited and precarious equal­ity predicated on (or more pointedly in exchange for) the ‘elimina­tion of the Native’,” thereby reproducing settler hegemony.59 Adam Gary Lewis’s critique of the Occupy movement challenges anarchist projects that occur on stolen Indigenous lands to integrate analysis of historical and contemporary colonization into their theory and practice and begin to explore what decolonizing relationships to land might look like. He suggests that the movement “shows the danger of experiments in alternative futures that risk reinscribing structures of settler colonialism if their underlying context on Indigenous land is not challenged.” Lewis urges anarchists to look towards Indigenous theory and action that aims to construct pregurative futures outside the state and capitalism as a necessary reference point that all radical projects need to defer to explicitly, in order to foster direct relational accountability to Indigenous laws and lifeways.60 In Unsettling the Commons, Craig Fortier addresses the issue of anti-authoritarian organizers and the struggle for “the commons” within a range of set­tler colonial contexts. Fortier also interrogates the debate that took place within Occupy camps regarding what it means to claim “the commons” on stolen land, and urges that activists take up a political practice of “unsettling” by recognizing the incommensurability of political goals that claim access to space/territory on stolen land.61 
Certainly few, if any, (non-Indigenous) anarchists involved in Occu­py did not account for Indigenous sovereignty or settler colonialism in relation to the abuse of power by major banks and multinational corporations, but the obvious should also be noted: not all those in­volved in the movement were anarchist. In other words, the problem cannot be fully attributed to anarchist oversight; rather, it is indica­tive of the normalization of settler colonialism that is endemic to so­ciety at large.  Additionally, in cities across both the U.S. and Canada, some activists did intervene or otherwise reckon with the assump­tions of the concept and practice of “occupy,” acknowledging and in some cases asserting Indigenous sovereignty and decolonization as central to critically challenging the State-capitalist nexus. In the U.S. context, some cities rejected the “Occupy” logo, opting for alterna­tive ways of framing the struggle. For example, in Oakland – aer long engagement with some contention – the name was changed to “Decolonize Oakland,” and in Honolulu there was “Deoccupy Hono­lulu,” speaking to the Hawaiian struggle calling for the U.S. govern­ment to end its illegal occupation of Hawai’i. In Seattle, anarchists, the People of Color caucus, and others called for a new name, “De­colonize/Occupy Seattle” and passed a “decolonize” resolution in the General Assembly noting: “It [‘Decolonize/Occupy Seattle’] empha­sizes this is stolen native land, we’re not trying to continue that co­lonial occupation, we’re trying to end it.”62 In the Canadian context, this was the case in both Victoria and Vancouver. For example, Allan Antli recounts that anarchists in Victoria “invited an Indigenous activist to speak about Indigenous sovereignty and decolonization at the rst ‘Occupy’ inspired meetings in fall 2011 and initiated a con­versation at the General Assembly that ended with the adoption of a new name – ‘ e People’s Assembly of Victoria’ – and the pointed rejection of the ‘Occupy’ label as colonialist.”63 He also relates that “a small group of conspiracy types broke o and tried to perpetuate ‘Occupy Victoria’ with no results – their eorts quickly dissipated into farce.”64 And, in Vancouver, anarchists immediately introduced Indigenous sovereignty and decolonization as foundational plat­forms of that city’s “Occupy Together” movement.65Although these examples provide models for engagement, they tended to be more the exception than the rule. 
If the quest to expropriate land as territory is the irreducible element in settler colonial political projects, then what does that mean when it comes to anarchists and other sorts of territorial practices? Carrie Mott details the ways in which interpersonal conict can pose a seri­ous threat to Indigenous solidarity activism looking at a case study in southern Arizona along the U.S.-Mexico border between members of the Tohono O’odham Nation and non-Native anarchist activists (mostly white activists based in Tucson), whom she terms “settler activists.”66 She argues that “conicts are oen born of the challenges accompanying dierentials in social privilege due to dierences in race and ethnicity relative to white supremacist settler colonialism.” As Mott shows, even when Non-Native activists are “aware of the ways white supremacist settler colonial society privileges particular identities while marginalizing others,” such privileging is loaded with powerful emotions and histories that non-Native solidarity activists may not fully comprehend, especially the dense layers of trauma these processes evoke for Indigenous individuals.  In another example, Adam Gary Lewis, looking at resistance eorts at Stand­ing Rock against the Dakota Access Pipeline, examines struggles for Indigenous autonomy and decolonization to consider how anarchist can take an anti-colonial position beyond declaring one’s opposition to colonialism.67 He oers a take on how anarchists based in lands claimed by the U.S. and Canada can work for radical futures, given the context of both the ongoing structures of settler colonialism as well as Indigenous resurgence inextricably bound to relationships to land. In thinking through ways in which (non-Native) radical activists can engage in political resistance without recreating a set­tler colonial dynamic, he refers to the case of Standing Rock, where people deferred explicitly to the Great Sioux Nation whose land par­ticipants were on. But, beyond high prole campaigns and stand-os that need and deserve support of all forms (funds, physical presence, solidarity actions, etc.), anarchist could be attentive to more local­ized struggles, the places where they are positioned. In other words, Lewis urges anarchist comrades to work with Indigenous peoples and communities already “engaged in resistance to capitalism, colo­nialism and the state, and who are reimagining and reinvigorating community-based resurgence connected to land.”68 
e challenge is how to engage in social experimentation and radical process without reproducing settler colonial violence (not just avoid­ing the logics, but countering the practices of elimination that target Natives). Defying the logic of elimination means more than just an empty gesture of land acknowledgment; it can and should mean ending settler colonization. is also begs a series of questions as to what decolonization looks like in settler colonial contexts, where land is central to the struggle. 

Indigenous anarchist praxis 
As noted earlier, in 2005, Alfred coined the concept of “anarcho-in­digenism,” dening it as a commitment to Indigenous self-determi­nation with an anarchist orientation.69 at same year, an anarchist activist by the name “Aragorn!” wrote a piece titled, “Locating an Indigenous Anarchism,” for Green Anarchy, an eco-anarchist, mostly anarcho-primitivist magazine.70 He lays out what he sees as “rst principles” for an Indigenous anarchism: everything is alive, the as­cendance of memory, primacy on place as a politics of location, and relationality in a web of kinship.  In presenting pan-Indigenous val­ues as anarchist values, Aragorn! asks why there are not more Native people interested in anarchism, suggesting that part of the answer is that “anarchism is part of a European tradition so far outside of the mainstream that it isn’t generally interesting (or accessible) to non-Westerners,” and because many (if not most) “anarchists hold that race doesn’t matter; that it is, at best, a tool used to divide” and frag­ment.71 In response, Aragorn! suggests that abiding by the principles of self-determination and radical decentralization are important 
– along with three core principles within anarchism: direct action, mutual aid, and voluntary cooperation – to understand and respect “the fact that real living and breathing people do identify within racial and cultural categories and that this identication has conse­quences in terms of dealing with one another.” He further points to the reality that some Indigenous people may not want to cohabitate with non-Native individuals as a direct result of “the creation of social norms and cultures that they would not feel comfortable in, in a truly decentralized social environment.”72 Aragorn! does not men­tion this discomfort could be a consequence of settler colonialism.73 Nonetheless, in the end, he urges non-Native anarchists to cultivate Indigenous values and reshape their political standards. 
In their study of how anarchists have drawn on anthropological materials for the purpose of advancing the anarchist cause, Andrew Robinson and Simon Tormey reference arguments developed in the journal Green Anarchy (2000-2009). As they note, “Indigenous issues gured prominently from a perspective which emphasized Indige­nous peoples’ ecological and anti-systemic claims alongside critiques of industrial civilization.”74 And while the coverage tended to refer to Indigenous peoples as ‘pre-modern’, and in ways that might roman­ticize Indigenous pasts, their point is that Green Anarchy is a prime example of anarchists “looking for evidence of alternative social logics and alternative ways of being in the world from the Western liberal frame.”75 
Johnson and Ferguson avoid the common default of suggesting ei­ther “‘Indigenous people are really anarchists, aer all’ or ‘anarchists are not really settlers, aer all’,” so as not to conate or collapse the two.76 Identifying several commonalities – including how anarchism and Indigenous politics both enact and embody their goals while resisting incorporation into hegemonic arrangements – they also point out that “state time” and “settler time” bracket anarchism and indigeneity as “untimely,” yet in distinct ways.77 As they put it, “In­digenous thinkers are discounted in hegemonic time as hopelessly nostalgic for a pristine but lost past, while anarchists are dismissed as hopelessly optimistic for a perfect but impossible future”78: yet, both refuse to be “temporal anomalies.”79 Of course, here Johnson and Ferguson are speaking to a long line of colonial discourses about Indigenous peoples as frozen in the past (an “authentic Native” can never be modern) 80 while anarchists are framed as too future-orient­ed and therefore not ‘practical’ enough in the present. 
In anarchist contexts, when one mentions Indigenous peoples, one of the most common points of reference is the Zapatistas.81 As many in anarchist (and other leist) political milieus know, the Army of National Liberation – Ejército Zapatista de Liberación Nacional (EZLN) – went public on January 1, 1994, releasing the First Dec­laration and Revolutionary Laws from the Lacandon jungle on the same day the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) came into eect. is eectively amounted to an EZLN declaration of war on the Mexican government, which the Zapatistas considered illegitimate. ey opted for armed struggle as part of their rebellion due to the lack of results that had been achieved through peaceful means of protest, and to defend themselves against the violence of the Mexican state. ey formed the Caracoles structure of Zapatista governance, a popular assembly of several hundred families self-governing through consensus-based decision-making.82 By 2019, the Zapatistas’ autonomous zones were comprised of ve regions, and they announced that they would extend their control with eleven more autonomous zones in Chiapas.83 As a result, the EZLN controls a substantial amount of territory in Chiapas, located in Oaxaca, the southernmost state of Mexico. e Zapatistas describe themselves as a decentralized organization that has no leader since political deci­sions are deliberated and decided in village assemblies that operate within over thirty rebel municipalities per zone (with anywhere from y to one-hundred communities, at least half a million people, engaging in a system of direct democracy).84 Although the Zapatistas make no claim to be anarchists, their mode of self-governance and success at creating a functioning alternative society resemble earlier examples of anarchist-syndicalism in action, particularly in Spain.85 Still, there are elements that some anarchists take exception to at play in these autonomous zones, including the role of liberation theology, Marxist underpinnings, and military hierarchy. 
Non-Indigenous anarchists may cite the Zapatista struggle as ‘cred’ to claim they know Indigenous movements – yet these same an­archists may be less likely to engage in meaningful solidarity with Indigenous struggles closer to home in the U.S. and Canada, partly because these may not have the romantic allure of armed autonomist struggles. One example of a non-violent North American Indigenous movement that challenges state power through horizontal organiz­ing centering Indigenous sovereignty is Idle No More (INM). ree First Nations women – Nina Wilson, Jessica Gordon, and Sylvia McAdam – and one non-Native ally, Sheelah McLean, founded INM in November 2012, calling for “refounded nation-to-nation rela­tions based on mutual respect.”86 Although not explicitly anarchist, INM is a grassroots movement rather than a political organization, and it is comprised of members of First Nations, Métis and Inuit peoples and their non-Aboriginal supporters in Canada.  Most active throughout 2013, but still active, INM was a response to Canadian legislative abuses of Indigenous treaty rights and the dismantling of environmental protection laws by then-Prime Minister Stephen Harper and the Conservative federal government. With the savvy use of social media, INM rapidly grew into an inclusive, continent-wide network of urban and rural Indigenous activists working with non-Indigenous allies to build a movement for Indigenous rights and the protection of land, water, and sky.87 As the vision statement articulates: “Idle No More calls on all people to join in a peaceful revolution which honours and fullls Indigenous sovereignty and which protects the land, the water, and the sky. Colonization contin­ues through attacks to Indigenous rights and damage and harm to all our relations. We must repair these violations, live the spirit and intent of the treaty relationship, work towards justice in action, and protect Mother Earth.”88 INM actions have been diverse, including round dances in public places such as shopping malls and outside of prisons – as well as blockades of rail lines to halt ‘business as usual.’ Adopting a range of actions, INM protests are intent on protesting the Canadian government’s abuse of state power through ongoing settler colonial violence perpetrated against Indigenous peoples. Adam J Barker notes that Idle No More represents a renewed asser­tion of Indigenous sovereignty in opposition to settler colonization, one that was largely misunderstood in the broader Canadian politi­cal context because of its ‘lack’ of a center. As a horizontal, leaderless movement, INM “can tell us a lot about Indigenous activism, conser­vative politics, leist resistance, and persistent settler colonialism in Canada.”89  Still, it is important to note that there are critiques of Idle No More from an anarchist Indigenous perspective – namely that it was not exactly all grassroots. For example, Zig Zag (aka Gord Hill) notes that “Indian Act chiefs and band councils, the Assembly of First Nations and its regional branches, Aboriginal service organiza­tions, and organizations such as the Confederacy of Treaty 6 Chiefs, all contributed to the mobilization. . . None of these entities can be considered grassroots as they all receive funding and support from the colonial state.” He also has challenged what he saw as the “impo­sition of pacist doctrine,” and the mandate for peaceful protest.90 
A more recent development is the online resource, Indigenous Anarchist Federation (Federación Anarquista Indígena) (IAF-FAI). 
e platform “works to unite the unique anarchist struggle of Indig­enous people in North America. It is a platform to share Indigenous anarchist ideas, struggles, philosophies, and challenges.”91 IAF-FAI contends that Indigenous peoples have been practicing anarchism long before Europeans, which is one of the issues that oen arises when bringing indigeneity and anarchism into the same frame – nding points of connectivity and mutual legibility. However, it should go without saying that just because Indigenous peoples (with few exceptions) had stateless societies does not mean that one can generalize about their modes of governance when it comes to social hierarchies and authority. In any case, IAF-FAI notes that today, an­archism “is dominated by Euro-centric ideas about relations, culture, and spirituality,” despite there being other models that emerge from Indigenous lifeways.92 IAF-FAI explain that anarchists “in the so-called U.S. and Canada are predominantly white,” and that this real­ity profoundly shapes their anarchism. In contrast, IAF-FAI suggests that that is not the case with anarchism in Latin America, which has been shaped beyond its European origins by the contributions and struggles of Indigenous anarchists. As a result, the IAF-FAI insists: “Anarchism in the Americas must reect the Indigenous peoples’ traditions that were displaced by the forces of colonialism, forced-religious conversion, militarism, and capitalism. We must be able to articulate an Anarchism that both speaks to the material realities of our relatives both living on the rez93 and in diaspora, all while main­taining the diverse perspectives of our peoples’ various cultures.”94 
Indigenous revitalization, then, can open dierent pathways for reconnecting with traditional water and land-based practices that contribute to resurgence’s turning away from the state in ways that are generative, oering rich examples of what anarchists refer to as “pregurative politics” – that is, “creating a new society within the shell of the old.” 
Summaries 
e case studies presented here reect initiatives and struggles vis-à­
vis state power imposed by the governments and hegemonic societ­ies of the U.S., Canada, and Bolivia.94 Herein, readers will encounter contributions that draw on and/or speak to the eld of cultural stud­ies, as well as settler colonial studies, anarchist studies, and Native American and Indigenous Studies. e contributors speak to themes of resistance while moving beyond the state – featuring generative projects that oer alternatives modes of liberation through decolo­nial anarchist praxis. 
For non-Indigenous anarchists, and for those who are Indigenous but residing outside of their traditional homelands, the political and ethical challenge is to account for our respective relationships with the Indigenous people(s) on whose land we dwell and mobi­lize politically.  In “Land and Liberty: Settler Acknowledgement in Anarchist Pedagogies of Place,” eresa Warburton opens up a broad and critical conversation about how anarchists in the U.S. have failed to reckon with settler colonialism. Highlighting the ways in which structures of settlement have been expressed in distinctly anarchist terms that obscure settler colonialism, “not through a denial of it but through its acknowledgement,” she theorizes “settler anarchism,” which she denes as a form of anarchist praxis that reformulates the structure of settlement using anarchist logics.96 Moreover, she demonstrates how settler anarchism limits the ability to eectively confront the centrality of violence endemic to the structures of capitalism and the state.  Moving beyond a critique of how many anarchists have not adequately dealt with the question of settlement 
– how they “have picked up and reproduced some of these tropes in our own spaces, since their origins are both deeply engrained and purposefully obstructed—much like settlement itself ”97 – Warburton proposes ways in which anarchist activists can be more attentive in challenging settler colonial domination through “land pedagogy” that leads to ethical accountability to Indigenous peoples. In conclu­sion, she reects on how settler anarchists might draw on the work of Indigenous storytellers, activists, and intellectuals to reorient their own social locations with regard to place and politics – and as a re­sult, better confront the structures of power.  Her contribution goes beyond an abstract or merely theretical oering; as she puts it, her intervention is grounded in the ethics of “how we choose to live the politics we espouse.”98 
Turning to new forms of Indigenous diplomacies and relational responsibilities in the context of Indigenous nationhood in “Life Beyond the State: Regenerating Indigenous International Relations and Everyday Challenges to Settler Colonialism,” Je Corntassel (Cherokee) opens with resistance against a “natural” (fracked) gas pipeline being built by Coastal Gaslink Limited across the lands of the Wet’suwet’en peoples.  Aer the Royal Canadian Mounted Police raided Unist’ot’en Camp checkpoints (the Unist’ot’en are a ‘house’ in the Gilseyhu clan, one of ve clans making up the Wet’suwet’en Nation), Hereditary Chiefs of the Wet’suwet’en Nation proclaimed, “Reconciliation is Dead,” exposing the raid as indicative of the lack of government accountability following the 2015 report issued by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) of Canada (and the Canadian government's abdication in not following up with any comprehensive federal plan or policies to implement the TRC’s ‘calls to action’).99 Corntassel launches his essay with this case study to highlight the ways in which Indigenous peoples subject to Canadian domination are exercising self-determination and protection of their lands and waters through direct action and a politics of resurgence by de-centering the state and its attendant heteropatriarchial institu­tions. He delves into three other examples to show how Indigenous peoples are practicing international relations to create new forms of solidarity – both across colonial borders and with and among other Indigenous peoples – without formal state involvement. ese include: the 2015 Indigenous Women of the Americas Defenders of Mother Earth Treaty Compact; the 2015 Haida and Heiltsuk Treaty of Peace, Respect and Responsibility; and the 2020 Tyendinaga Mohawk blockade of the Via Rail in solidarity with the Wet’suwet’en. As he argues, this “turning away from the state is not just a literal positioning – it’s just as much about the de-centering of state author­ity in everyday life as well as remembering and re-imagining life beyond the state based on honoring relational responsibilities.”100 As Corntassel shows, these modes of prioritizing the varied Indigenous relationships to land, community and culture also expose the illegiti­macy of the state’s authority. 
Also included is an interview-style discussion, “Indigeneity, Sovereignty, Anarchy: a dialog with many voices,” between au­thor, carver, graphic artist, and anarchist sovereigntist Gord Hill (Kwakwaka’wakw) and anarchist activist Allan Antli, co-founder of Wet’suwet’en Solidarity Victoria, the Victoria Anarchist Bookfair, and Camas Books and Info Shop. e two reect on the impact of Indigenous knowledge and activism on the broader anarchist move­ment in ‘Canada,’ including non-Indigenous involvement in Indig­enous struggles, from the 1980s to the present.  ey also examine a selective historical archive, highlighting Indigenous thought as it relates to anarchist principles and key individuals who have weighed in on the relationship between anarchy and indigeneity. 
Turning to the Andes in “Anarchisms Otherwise: e Pedagogy of Anarco-Feminist Indigenous Critique,” Macarena Gómez-Barris focuses on Indigenous and mestizo women laborers and social movement leaders in Bolivia dating from the Spanish colonial period into modernity. She opens with the crisis of rising rates of femicide throughout the Américas and how Indigenous and mestizo anarchist feminists are challenging the structures of gender and sexual vio­lence in intimate settings as they are linked to authoritarian culture more broadly, in this case within the context of crushing neoliberal­ism. Pushing on the relationship between anarchism and feminism as a response, she shows how we can re-envision anarchism in order to stymie “the project of intimate, state, and corporate violence that depends upon the extraction of the female / sexed body for its expansion.”101 Drawing on a range of theories from U.S. Native Feminisms, Black feminisms and women of color feminism, as well as anarcho-Indigenous feminisms, she oers a case study of Mujeres Creando Comunidad (Women Creating Community), founded by Julieta Paredes, Maria Galindo and Monica Mendoza in 1985 – dur­ing the “transition to democracy” period in Bolivia. Connecting the onset of neoliberal privatization to the coercive power of intimida­tion and violence, the group oers a compelling example of political “practices of refusal” that characterize anarchist, feminist, Indige­nous activisms.  Gómez-Barris theorizes what she terms “anarchisms otherwise,” which she denes as “modes of relationality that step across the masculine archive of anarchistic activity towards experi­ential, embodied, and phenomenological modes of organizing below and against the activities of the state.”102 Importantly, though, as she shows, these modes go beyond denouncing colonial modes of gover­nance and authority: they also oer decolonial ways of “reimagining and generating new worlds outside of the intimate, public, and state logics of coercion.”103 
Mary Tuti Baker (Kanaka Maoli) turns to mutual aid and communi­ty empowerment in her essay, “Gardens of Political Transformation: Hawaiian Indigenism and Anarchism Embodied.” She explores the Indigenous Hawaiian concept of Aloha ‘ina (love and stewardship of the land) through the case study of Ho‘oulu ‘ina, a garden-farm operating under the auspices of Kokua Kalihi Valley Comprehensive Family Services, a non-prot based in a ‘high needs’ community in Honolulu. Baker argues Indigenous anarchist ideologies are impor­tant social structures that help to strengthen bonds between Indig­enous and non-Indigenous social justice movements. She situates her claim by rst addressing her positionality as a Kanaka Maoli (Native Hawaiian) researcher and focusing on place-based research grounded in gender decolonization that is oen part of restoring Indigenous relationships to land.  She examines four arenas of praxis that demonstrate the articulation of indigenism and anarchism within a Kanaka Maoli model for healthcare in Hawai’i. Baker oers an example of how people can work within existing structures that might look like run-of-the-mill social services, cultivating a space for land renewal projects and land-based pedagogy. ese social prac­tices are grounded in Hawaiian cultural frameworks that are inclu­sive – where everyone who participates can nd a place of belonging, regardless of whether they are Indigenous or not – and contribute to the principle of mutual aid and community care, as well as possibili­ties for healing trauma. Moving beyond critiques of Western liberal democracies, Baker also shows the way that the Indigenous Hawai­ian ideology of Aloha ‘ina oers the potential to create conditions for radical social transformation, which may also bolster organized resistance, resurgence, and (non-statist) Indigenous nation-build­ing.104 
As these contributions show, critical attention to Indigenous peoples, 
land, and sovereignty is not about romanticization (as some might caution in a cynical way) or harkening to some unsullied precolonial era. Rather, the works here delve into what forms of decolonization are possible in settler colonial contexts. 

Acknowledgements 
I would like to express warm and appreciative thanks to Rana Bara­kat, Lana Tatour, and Joseph Weiss for their willingness to read earlier versions of this introduction and oer critical feedback. Any errors that may remain are my sole responsibility. Mahalo nui loa to the contributors – eresa Warburton, Je Corntassel, Macarena Gómez-Barris, Mary Tuti Baker, Gord Hill and Allan Antli – for their brilliant thought-provoking work (and to Warburton, Corntas­sel, Gómez-Barris, and Baker for reading this introduction in dra' form). I also want to extend my gratitude to Debra Yepa-Pappanfor generously allowing her stunning visual art piece “Corn Maiden” to appear on the cover. Additional thanks also go to Warburton for extra support along the way, and to Allan Antli (editor-in-chief of the journal), as we brought the project to fruition. 

Notes 
1Saidiya Hartman theorizes the “aerlife of slavery.” Saidiya Hartman. 2006. Lose Your Mother: A Journey Along the Atlantic Slave Route, New York: Macmillan, 6. 2 David Stasavage. 2020. “Covid-19 has exposed the weakness of America’s federal government,” CNN, July 1, https://www.cnn.com/2020/07/01/opinions/covid­19-america-federal-government-stasavage/index.html. Accessed October 2, 2020. 3 Ibid. 4 Dean Spade. 2020. Mutual Aid: Building Solidarity During is Crisis (and the Next), London and New York City: Verso Press. 5 Deidre McPhillips. 2020. “COVID-19’s Tragic Eect on American Indians: A State-by-State Analysis,” U.S. News and World Report, October 7, https://www.usnews.com/news/healthiest-communities/articles/2020-10-07/a­state-by-state-analysis-of-the-impact-of-covid-19-on-native-americans; Accessed October 7, 2020. Anya Zoledziowski. 2020. “Governments Worldwide Are Failing Indigenous Peoples During the Pandemic,” July 14, https://www.vice.com/en/article/y3znqb/governments-worldwide-are-failing­indigenous-peoples-during-the-covid-pandemic. Accessed July 15, 2020. 6 Hollie Silverman, Konstantin Toropin, Sara Sidner and Leslie Perrot. 2020. “Navajo Nation surpasses New York state for the highest Covid-19 infection rate in the U.S.,” CNN, May 18, https://www.cnn.com/2020/05/18/us/navajo-nation­
infection-rate-trnd/index.html. Accessed May 19, 2020. 7 Wyatte Grantham-Philips. 2020. “On the Navajo Nation, COVID-19 death toll is higher than any U.S. state.  Here’s how you can support community relief,” USA Today, October 24, https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2020/10/24/ covid-native-americans-how-to-help-navajo-nation/3652816001/. Accessed October 25, 2020. See also: Native News Online Sta. 2020. “Navajo Nation Surpasses 16,000 Covid-19 Cases on Saturday; Death Toll at 648,” Native News Online, November 29, https://nativenewsonline.net/currents/navajo-nation-sur­passes-16-000-covid-19-cases-on-saturday-death-toll-at-648; For daily statistics on positive cases of Covid-19 at Navajo, see Navajo Department of Health, “Dikos Ntsaaígíí-19 (COVID-19),” https://www.ndoh.navajo-nsn.gov/covid-19. Accessed November 29, 2020. 8 Creede Newton. 2020. “Navajo Nation COVID vaccine roll-out begins as cases, deaths rise,” Al Jazeera, December 17, https://www.aljazeera.com/ news/2020/12/17/navajo-nation-covid-vaccine-rollout-begins-as-cases-deaths­rise. Accessed December 17, 2020. 9 Arlyssa Becenti, “COVID deaths reach 1,000 on Navajo Nation, Navajo Times, January 28, 2021, https://navajotimes.com/reznews/covid-deaths-reach-1000-on­navajo-nation/. 10 Rima Krisst. 2020. “Navajo-Hopi relief group seeks funding to sustain services,” Navajo Times, November 25, https://navajotimes.com/reznews/navajo-hopi-relief­group-seeks-funding-to-sustain-services/. Accessed November 26, 2020. 11 Megan Marples. 2020. “Navajo Nation faces devastating loss from Covid-19 pandemic,” CNN, November 24, 2020, https://www.cnn.com/2020/11/24/health/navajo-nation-coronavirus-losses-well­ness/index.html. Accessed November 26, 2020. 12 Simone Perez and Paula Raos. 2020. “Coronavirus Is Devastating the Navajo Nation,” VICE, July 20, https://www.vice.com/en/article/4ayq3p/coronavirus-is­devastating-the-navajo-nation. Accessed July 21, 2020. 13 Cecilia Nowell. 2020. “In the Navajo Nation, Anarchism Has Indigenous Roots,” 
e Nation, September 25, https://www.thenation.com/article/activism/anarchism­navajo-aid/. Accessed September 30, 2020. 14 See the website for the K’é Infoshop to learn more. http://keinfoshop.org/. Ac­cessed October 2, 2020. 15 Nowell, Ibid. 16 Ibid. 17 Simone Perez and Paula Raos. 18 To learn more about this project, one can look to the website: https://www.nava­johopisolidarity.org/. Accessed October 2, 2020. 19 Oxford English Dictionary 2011. Oxford, Oxford University Press. 20 United Nations. n.d., “Background of International Day of the World’s Indig­enous Peoples, August 9,” https://www.un.org/en/observances/indigenous-day/ background. Accessed November 30, 2020. A denition proposed by UN Spe­cial Rapporteur Jose Martinez Cobo remains most inuential today: indigenous peoples are “those which, having a historical continuity with pre-invasion and pre-colonial societies that have developed on their territories, consider themselves distinct from other sectors of the societies now prevailing in those territories, or parts of them.” United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Aairs. 1982. “Martínez Cobo Study,” Chapter V, https://www.un.org/development/desa/indigenouspeoples/publications/martinez­cobo-study.html. Accessed December 1, 2020. Je Corntassel (whose work is included in this issue) has also written on this topic, drawing on the work of Holm, et al (cited above) and articulating a broader Indigenous context. He notes the vast array of denitional standards for Indigenous peoples in international law. Corntassel oers a survey of Indigenous denitions developed by academicians in the eld of nationalism/international law as well as practitioners from IGOs and NGOs, arguing that “a balance between self-identication and establishing a work­ing denition of Indigenous peoples is possible. In turn, he suggests that utilizing a model of ‘Peoplehood’ to present “a new working denition of Indigenous peoples that is both exible and dynamic.” See Je Corntassel. 2003. “Who is Indigenous? Peoplehood and ‘Ethnonationalist’ Approaches to Rearticulating Indigenous Iden­tity,” Nationalism and Ethnic Politics, Spring, Vol 9(1): 75-100. 21 Ella Shohat. 1992. “Notes on the ‘Post-Colonial’,” Social Text, 31/32: 99-113. 22 George Manuel. 2018. e Fourth World: An Indian Reality, Minneapolis: Uni­versity of Minnesota Press. 23 Steven Newcomb. 2008. Pagans in the Promised Land: Decoding the Doctrine of Christian Discovery, Golden, CO: Fulcrum Publishing. 24 Ibid. 25 Baron Pineda. 2017. “Indigenous Pan-Americanism: Contesting Settler Colo­nialism and the Doctrine of Discovery at the UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues,” American Quarterly, 69 (4): 823-832; John Price and Nick XEMOLTW Claxton. 2019/20. “Whose Land Is It? Rethinking Sovereignty in British Colum­bia,” e British Columbian Quarterly, Winter 204: 115-138. 26 Patrick Wolfe. 2006. “Settler colonialism and the elimination of the native,” Jour­nal of Genocide Research, December 8(4): 387–409. 27 J. Khaulani Kauanui, Ed. 2018. “Interview with Patrick Wolfe,” Speaking of Indigenous Politics: Conversations with Activists, Scholars, and Tribal Leaders, Min­neapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 343-360. 28 Ibid, 387. 29 Ibid, 403. 30 J. Khaulani Kauanui. 2016. “‘A Structure, Not an Event’: Settler Colonialism and Enduring Indigeneity,” Emergent Critical Analytics for Alternative Humanities, Spring 5(1), https://csalateral.org/issue/5-1/forum-alt-humanities-settler-colonialism-endur­ing-indigeneity-kauanui/. Accessed December 1, 2020. 31 Emil Keme advocates renaming “America” and “Latin America” Abiayala, to refer to the entire continent. As he details, the concept comes from the cosmogony of the Guna people in the region of Guna Yala (or the land of the Guna), formally known as San Blas, in present-day Panama. He argues that renaming the continent is a necessary part of epistemic decolonization to bolster the establishment of In­
digenous peoples’ autonomy and self-determination. Keme notes that while there are other alternatives, they are typically associated in relation to specic Indig­enous geopolitical territories and peoples. Emil Keme (translated by Adam Coon). 2018. “For Abiayala to Live, the Americas Must Die: Toward a Transhemispheric Indigeneity,” Native American and Indigenous Studies, Spring 5(1): 42-68. 32 Shannon Speed. 2017. “Structures of Settler Capitalism in Abya Yala,” American Quarterly, December 69(4): 783-790. 33 Ibid, 787. 34 Ibid. 35 Ibid. 36 Tom Holm, J. Diane Pearson, and Ben Chavis oer the “Peoplehood Matrix,” suggesting that Native American communities share four main components – language, sacred history, place or territory, and ceremonial cycles – which together “make up a complete system that accounts for particular behaviors of people in­digenous to particular territories.” Tom Holm, J. Dianne Pearson, and Ben Chavis. 2003. “Peoplehood: A Model for the Extension of Sovereignty in American Indian Studies,” Wicazo S Review, Spring 18(1): 7-24. 37 Drawing on prior work by Robert Warrior, I oer an overview of these dier­ing accounts of sovereignty in J. Khaulani Kauanui. 2018. Paradoxes of Hawaiian Sovereignty, Durham: Duke University Press, 25-28. 38 Taiaiake Alfred. 2005. Wasáse: Indigenous Pathways of Action and Freedom, Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 39 Alejandra Gaitán-Barrera & Govand Khalid Azeez. 2018. “Beyond recogni­tion: autonomy, the state, and the Mapuche Coordinadora Arauco Malleco,” Latin American and Caribbean Ethnic Studies, 13(2): 113-134. 40 Ibid. 41 Alejandra Gaitán-Barrera and Govand Khalid Azeez. 2015. “Regaining Pre­colonial Sovereignty: e Case of Miskitu Resistance,” Journal of Iberian and Latin American Research, 21(3): 360-373. 42 anks to Joseph Weiss for oering this important point. 43 Kahala Johnson and Kathy E. Ferguson. 2019. “Anarchism and Indigeneity,” e Palgrave Handbook of Anarchism, Carl Levy and Matthew S. Adams, Eds. New York: London: Palgrave Macmillan, 697-714, 707. 44 Ibid. 45 Ibid ,708. 46 Ibid. 47 Richard Day and Sean Haberle. Sept-Oct 2006.  “Anarchist-Indigenous solidar­ity at the Six Nations’ barricade,” New Socialist: Ideas for Radical Change 58: 26-27; Erica Michelle Lagalisse. Spring 2011. “Marginalizing Magdalena”: Intersections of Gender and the Secular in Anarchoindigenist Solidarity Activism,” Signs 36(3): 653-678; Adam J. Barker and Jenny Pickerill. 2012. “Radicalizing Relationships to and rough Shared Geographies: Why Anarchists Need to Understand Indig­enous Connections to Land and Place,” Antipode 44 (5): 1705–1725. Other works that have tracked and critically analyzed solidarity politics across social dierences between anarchists and Indigenous activists include: Richard Day and Sean Haber­
le. Sept-Oct 2006. “Anarchist-Indigenous solidarity at the Six Nations’ barricade,” New Socialist: Ideas for Radical Change 58: 26-27; Glen Coulthard, Jacqueline Lasky, Adam Lewis, and Vanessa Watts, Eds. 2011. “Working Across Dierence for Post-Imperial Futures: Intersections Between Anarchism, Indigenism and Femi­nism,” A nities. And, for a recent book of interviews with individuals speaking to Indigenous anarchism, most of whom are Indigenous themselves – Véronique Hébert, Gord Hill, Freda Huson, J. Khaulani Kauanui, Clion Ariwakehte Nicho­lasee – see Francis Dupuis-Déri and Benjamin Pillet, Eds. 2019. L’anarcho-indigé­nisme, Montreal: Lux Canada. 48 Adam J. Barker and Jenny Pickerill. 2012. “Radicalizing Relationships To and 
rough Shared Geographies: Why Anarchists Need to Understand Indigenous Connections to Land and Place,” Antipode Vol 44(5): 1705–1725. 49 Ibid. 50 David Graeber. 2011. “Occupy Wall Street’s Anarchist Roots,” Al Jazeera, November 30, http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/opin­ion/2011/11/2011112872835904508.html. 51 http://occupywallst.org/about/ 52 National Museum of the American Indian. 2011. “America’s rst urban myth?” NMAI blog, April 3, https://blog.nmai.si.edu/main/2011/08/americas-rst-urban­myth.html. Accessed January 3, 2020. 53 Joanne Barker. 2018. “Social text: Territory as Analytic: e Dispossession of Lenapehoking and the Subprime Crisis,” Social Text Vol. 36 (2): 27-28. 54 Joanne Barker, Tequila Sovereign, “Manna-hata” http://tequilasovereign. blogspot.com/2011/10/manna-hata.html; “ Because Not All 99%-ers Are Created Equal,” http://tequilasovereign.blogspot.com/2011/10/because-not-all-99-ers-are­created.html; “ e Dierence that History Makes in the OWS Movements” http:// tequilasovereign.blogspot.com/2011/10/dierence-that-history-makes-in-ows. html “Memorandum of Solidarity with Indigenous Peoples,” http://tequilasovereign.blogspot.com/2011/10/proposal-to-occupy-oakland-mem­orandum.html; “What Does ‘Decolonize Oakland’ Mean? What Can ‘Decolonize Oakland’ Mean?,” http://tequilasovereign.blogspot.com/2011/10/what-does-decol­onize-oakland-mean-what.html. All accessed December 2, 2011. 55 Barker 2018. 56 David Graeber. 2013. e Democracy Project: a History, a Crisis, a Movement, 20-21, New York: Random House. 57 Adam J. Barker. 2012. “Already Occupied: Indigenous peoples, settler colonial­ism, and the Occupy movements in North America.”Social Movement Studies, 11(3-4): 327-334. 58 Ibid. 59 Sandy Grande. 2013. “Accumulation of the primitive: the limits of liberalism and the politics of occupy Wall Street,” Settler Colonial Studies, 3(3-4): 369-380. 60 Adam Gary Lewis. 2015. “Anti-State Resistance on Stolen Land: Settler Colonial­ism, Settler Identity and the Imperative of Decolonization,” 145-186. New Devel­opments in Anarchist Studies, P.J. Lilley and Je Santz, Eds. Brooklyn: ought 
Crimes. See also: Adam Gary Lewis. 2017. “Imagining autonomy on stolen land: settler colonialism, anarchism and the possibilities of decolonization?,” Settler Colonial Studies, 7(4): 474-495. 61 Craig Fortier. 2017. Unsettling the Commons: Social Movements Against, Within, and Beyond Settler Colonialism, Oakland and Edinburgh: AK Press. 62 Black Orchid Collective, “ e Radicalization of Decolonize/Occupy Seattle,” In­surgent Notes: Journal of Communist eory and Practice, January 12, 2012,  http:// insurgentnotes.com/2012/01/guest-article-the-radicalization-of-decolonizeoccu­py-seattle/ 63 Allan Antli, personal communication via email, January 25, 2021. See also “Occupy Victoria – People’s Assembly,” Dean Kaylan, December 17, 2011,  https:// deankalyan.com/occupy-victoria-peoples-assembly-of-victoria/. Accessed January 25, 2021. 64 Ibid. 65 See Harsha Walia, “Letter to the Occupy Together Movement,” Critical Legal 
inking, October 19, 2011, https://criticallegalthinking.com/2011/10/19/letter-to­occupy-together-movement/. Accessed January 25, 2021. 
ese examples of non-Indigenous North American anarchists in general be­ing indierent or even hostile toward Indigenous sovereignty and, by extension, failing to address decolonialization as the central issue in North America, may look dierent in some Canadian contexts. For example, Allan Antli’s interview with Gord Hill (included here) suggests that “in Canada there is a history of criti­cal consciousness regarding indigeneity, sovereignty, and decolonization -- and activism related to it -- that goes back at least to the 1970s.” In other words, the movement there is perhaps more historically developed on these issues than the movement in the United States. 66 Carrie Mott. 2016. “ e Activist Polis: Topologies of Conict in Indigenous,” Antipode Vol. 48(1):193–211. 67 Adam Gary Lewis. 2017. “From Standing Rock to Resistance in Context: To­wards Anarchism against Settler Colonialism” E-International Relations, February 1, https://www.e-ir.info/2017/02/01/from-standing-rock-to-resistance-in-context­towards-anarchism-against-settler-colonialism/. Accessed January 3, 2020. 68 Ibid. 69 Alfred, Ibid. Lewis has further theorized the concept: “I conceptualize anarcha-Indigenism rst as a ‘third space’, following post-colonial theorists, and extend this concept towards an ‘n-dimensional’ space of meeting, where theoretical perspectives can come to engage with one another. is space consists of points of contact and resonance chiey between Indigenist, anarchist and feminist theory and practice, but also extends to any perspective that might meet the core com­mitments of anarcha-Indigenism, namely resistance to all forms of oppression and domination.” See Adam Gary Lewis. 2012. “Decolonizing Anarchism: Expanding Anarcha-Indigenism in eory and Practice,” A thesis submitted to the Graduate Program in Cultural Studies in conformity with the requirements for the Degree of Master of Arts Queen’s University Kingston, Ontario, Canada. 
is piece (originally published in Green Anarchy) was reprinted by the Indige­
nous Anarchist Federation, https://iaf-fai.org/2020/04/13/locating-an-indigenous­anarchism/. Accessed October 20, 2020. Aragorn! self-identied as an Indigenous individual but neglected to note his background in terms of the substance of that claim, with no mention of any specic tribal a liation. 71 Ibid. 72 Ibid. 73 Ibid. He further oers another explanation for why Native people may lack inter­est in anarchism: that anarchist milieus “tend to have a distinct language, cadence, and set of priorities” that may help in cohering dierent anarchist factions (on the one hand), but alienate people who may nd “the arrogance of the educated along with the worst of radical politics’ excesses.” 74 Andrew Robinson and Simon Tormey. 2012. “Beyond the state: Anthropology and ‘actually-existing anarchism’,” Critique of Anthropology, 32(2): 143-157. See p145. 75 Ibid. 76 Ferguson and Johnson, 697. 77 Ibid, 698. 78 Ibid. 79 Ibid, 699. 80 Kevin Bruyneel. 2007. e ird Space of Sovereignty, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press; Jean M. O’Brien. 2010. Firsting and Lasting, Minneapolis: Uni­versity of Minnesota Press; Mark Riin. 2017. Beyond Settler Time, Durham: Duke University Press; Joseph Weiss. 2018. Shaping the Future on Haida Gwaii, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 81 Roy Krøvel. 2010. “Anarchism, e Zapatistas and e Global Solidarity Move­ment,” Global Discourse, 1(2): 20-40; 10; “What every anarchist should know about the Zapatista’s [sic] and Chiapas,” e Struggle Archive,  http://www.struggle.ws/ mexico/anarchist.html. Accessed January 2, 2020. 82 ese distinct communities are linked in a federation with other communities, which constitute autonomous municipalities that comprise a Caracol, which are connected to create a region.  Pablo González Casanova. 2005. “ e Zapatista ‘car­acoles’: Networks of resistance and autonomy,” Socialism and Democracy, 19(3):79­92; Ross, John. 2005. “Celebrating the Caracoles: Step by Step, the Zapatistas Advance on the Horizon,” Humboldt Journal of Social Relations, 29(1): 39-46; Pablo Gonz. 2011. “ e Zapatista Caracoles: Networks of Resistance and Autonomy,” Socialism and Democracy Online, March 5, http://sdonline.org/39/volume-19-no-3/the-zapatista-caracoles-networks-of-resis­tance-and-autonomy/. Accessed January 3, 2020. 83 n.a. 2019. “Zapatistas to extend their control with 11 more autonomous zones in Chiapas President López Obrador welcomed the announcement, saying it would benet the people,” Mexican Daily News, August 20. https://mexiconewsdaily.com/ news/zapatistas-to-extend-their-control/. Accessed January 3, 2020. 84 Staughton Lynd and Andrej Grubai. 2008. Wobblies and Zapatistas: Conversa­tions on Anarchism, Marxism and Radical History, Oakland and Edinburgh: PM Press; Andrej Grubai and Denis O’Hearn. 2016. Living at the Edges of Capital­
ism: Adventures in Exile and Mutual Aid, Berkeley: University of California Press; and Shannon Speed. 2006. Rights in Rebellion: Indigenous Struggle and Human Rights in Chiapas, Palo Alto: Stanford University Press. 85 Andrew Flood. 1999. “ e Zapatistas, anarchism and ‘Direct democracy’,” Anarcho-Syndicalist Review 27, Winter, reprinted September 23, 2008, https://anar­chism.pageabode.com/andrewnood/zapatistas-anarchism-direct-democracy. Accessed January 3, 2020. 86 Idle No More, “An Indigenous-Led Social Movement,” https://idlenomore.ca/ about-the-movement/. Accessed January 3, 2020. 87 For a rich overview of the movement, readers can listen to my interview with activist-scholar Niigaanwewidam James Sinclair (St. Peter’s/Little Peguis In­dian Settlement in Manitoba). J. Khaulani Kauanui. 2013. “Episode 52: Idle No More,” Horizonal Power Hour, January 8, https://horizontalpowerhour.wordpress. com/2013/01/21/243/. Accessed January 3, 2020. 88 Ibid. 89 Adam J. Barker. 2015. “‘A Direct Act of Resurgence, a Direct Act of Sovereignty’: Reections on Idle No More, Indigenous Activism, and Canadian Settler Colonial­ism,” Globalizations, 12(1): 43-65. 90 Zig Zag, “Indian Act Chiefs and Idle No More: Snakes in theGrassroots?” (2012), https://warriorpublications.wordpress.com/2012/12/14/indian-act-chiefs­and-idle-no-more-snakes-in-the-grassroots/. Accessed January 25, 2021. 91 Indigenous Anarchist Federation, What We Are About,” https://iaf-fai.org/ about/. Accessed October 20, 2020. 92 Ibid. 93 Here ‘rez’ is a vernacular way to refer to an Indian ‘reservation’ or ‘reserve.’ In the U.S. context, an Indian ‘reservation’ is an area of land that has been reserved for an Indian tribe, band, village, or nation. e federal government holds legal title to the reserved territory, whereas the tribe holds benecial title to the land (that aords them the exclusive right of occupancy). See David E. Wilkins and Heidi Kiiwetinepinesiik Stark, American Indian Politics and the American Political System, 4th Edition, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littleeld, 2018.  In Canada, First Nations have Indian ‘reserves,’ which are lands claimed by the Crown and set aside through the Indian Act “for the use and benet” of the respective bands (a body of Indians) for which they were set apart under treaties or other agreements.” Indian Act (R.S.C., 1985, c. I-5), https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/I-5/page-1.html?tx thl=tract+lands+land#s-2. Accessed December 10, 2020. 94 Ibid. 
ree of this issue’s articles were rst presented as conference papers at a one-day event I organized at Wesleyan University, “Pedagogies of Anarchist Praxis,” April 12, 2019. 96 Warburton, this volume, p 44. 97 Ibid. p 45. 98 Ibid. p 48. 99 Corntassel, this volume, p 72. 100 Ibid. p 73. 
101 Gómez-Barris, this volume, p 119. 102 Ibid. p 119. 103 Ibid. p 121. 104 Baker, this volume, p 113. 


